897

Acta Pharmacologica Sinica 2005 Aug; 26 (8): 897–907

©2005 CPS and SIMM

Invited review

Molecular basis of ataxia telangiectasia and related diseases

Lindsay G BALL, Wei XIAO1

Department of Microbiology and Immunology, University of Saskatchewan, Saskatoon, SK Canada, S7N 5E5.

Abstract

Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a rare human disease characterized by extreme cellular
sensitivity to radiation and a predisposition to cancer, with a hallmark of onset
in early childhood. Several human diseases also share similar symptoms with AT
albeit with different degrees of severity and different associated disorders. While
all AT patients contain mutations in the AT-mutated gene (ATM), most other ATlike
disorders are defective in genes encoding an MRN protein complex consisting
of Mre11, Rad50 and Nbs1. Both ATM and MRN function as cellular sensors
to DNA double-strand breaks, which lead to the recruitment and phosphorylation
of an array of substrate proteins involved in DNA repair, apoptosis and cell-cycle
checkpoints, as well as gene regulation, translation initiation and telomere
maintenance. ATM is a member of the family of phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase-like
protein kinases (PIKK), and the discovery of many ATM substrates provides the
underlying mechanisms of heterologous symptoms among AT patients. This
review article focuses on recent findings related to the initial recognition of doublestrand
breaks by ATM and MRN, as well as a DNA-dependent protein kinase
complex consisting of the heterodimer Ku70/Ku80 and its catalytic subunit DNAPKcs,
another member of PIKK. This possible interaction suggests that a much
greater complex is involved in sensing, transducing and co-ordinating cellular
events in response to genome instability.

Key words

ataxia telangiectasia; DNA damage; DNA repair;
cdc genes; phosphotransferases

1 Correspondance to Dr Wei XIAO.
Phn 1-306-966-4308.
Fax 1-306-966-4311.
E-mail wei.xiao@usask.ca

Received 2005-04-08
Accepted 2005-05-05

doi: 10.1111/j.1745-7254.2005.00165.x

Ataxia telangiectasia clinical presentation

Ataxia telangiectasia (AT) is a rare human disease characterized
by extreme sensitivity to radiation[1–5]. AT is a progressive
neurodegenerative disorder causing a predisposition
to cancer, with a hallmark of onset in early childhood[6–9].
AT is seen in approximately 1 in every 40 000 live births in the
USA, although the frequency varies from country to country[10].
At birth, infants appear normal and begin walking at a
normal age (approximately age 1 year); however, by age 2–3
ataxia (loss of muscle co-ordination) becomes visible and
generally by age 10 patients are confined to a wheelchair[10].
Ataxia generally precedes telangiectasia, which is described
as the chronic dilation of a group of capillaries causing
elevated, dark red blotches on the skin or eyes[11]. This disease
is additionally characterized by cerebellar degeneration,
and immune system defects[12–14]. In younger children, diagnosis
of AT is somewhat obscure as the cerebellum appears

to be of normal size for several years although onset of ataxia
is prevalent. However, by age 10 magnetic resonance imaging
(MRI) generally shows an abnormal cerebellum that has
decreased in volume[15]. Studies have shown a gradual decrease
in granular and Purkinje cells, which are large branching
cells of the nervous system and are located in the middle
layer of the lower part of the brain, or the cerebellum[14–16].
Unfortunately, there is currently no treatment for AT except
for supportive therapy of secondary symptoms[17].
In addition to an up to several hundredfold increase in
developing certain types of cancers (eg lymphoma) in AT
patients, epidemiological studies suggest that heterozygote
AT mutation carriers are also at increased risk for cancer,
particularly breast carcinoma[18,19]. This is of great significance
as it is estimated that approximately 1% of the population
are AT carriers. However, it is noted that a recent study
showed that heterozygous AT mutations did not confer genetic
predisposition to early onset of breast cancer[20].
898

Ball LG et al Acta Pharmacologica Sinica ISSN 1671-4083

Serum alphafetoprotein (AFP) levels are elevated in more
than 95% of AT patients, which is therefore used to diagnose
AT and to distinguish from AT variants[4,5,10,21]. When
dealing with AFP it is important to note that AFP levels are
normally higher at birth than those at age 2, thus diagnostics
for AT using AFP cannot be conducted until after the age of
2. There are known malignancies associated with AFP[10,22].
For example, AFP is known to be elevated in case of spina
bifida and anencephaly, and this elevation is the hallmark
test for early detection of both conditions. Spina bifida is
part of a group of birth defects called neural tube defects,
which affect embryonic structures that eventually develop
into the brain, spinal cord and tissues that enclose them.
Anencephaly is a congenital condition in which portions of
the brain fail to develop. Because AFP is such a diagnostic
hallmark for AT, it is surprising that the mechanism of AFP
upregulation in normal and AT cells has not been reported.
Nevertheless, given the commonality of AFP elevation in all
of the above 3 diseases, it is conceivable that the increased
AFP level is responsible for the Purkinje cell degeneration in
AT patients.

Ataxia telangiectasia-related diseases

There are several human deficiencies and diseases that
are closely related to AT. For example, molecular cloning has
now allowed for the distinction between AT and other autosomal
recessive cerebellar ataxias (ARCA) such as Friedreich
ataxia or A-TFresno, an old-fashioned term for an AT variant[23–25],
oculomotor apraxias 1 (aprataxin deficiency), oculomotor
apraxias 2 (senataxin deficiency), aicardi syndrome and ATlike
disorder (ATLD)[26–29].
AT-like disorder is a very rare disorder with clinical features
similar to those of AT, with the most prominent similarity
being progressive cerebellar ataxia. However, ATLD patients
that do not present with telangiectasia[30,31], have a
later onset of neurological features, slower progression, and
thus milder symptoms compared to AT patients[27].
Closely related to AT and ATLD is the Nijmegen breakage
syndrome (NBS)[23–25]. NBS and ATLD have some overlapping
features such as hypersensitivity to ionizing radiation
and genome instability, and both are characterized by
neurological deficits[32,33]. Thus, NBS was long considered
as a clinical variant of AT. Clinical distinction has been made
as NBS patients also present with a characteristic facial appearance
and microcephaly as well as growth retardation[34].
Clearly the above AT-related human conditions suggest deficiency
at common cellular function(s) and genetic pathway
(s) with AT.

Laboratory findings in ataxia telangiectasia
and ataxia telangiectasia-related patients
Laboratory findings in patients with AT show: immunodeficiencies
emerging as decreased IgA, IgE and IgG2 levels[5,21,35–38],
characteristic chromosomal aberrations and an
increased rate of telomeric shortening[39], radiosensitivity[1–5],
as well as sensitivity to other DNA damaging agents and
non-DNA damaging agents[40]. Chromosome instability, cellcycle
checkpoint defects[3] and elevated serum levels of
AFP[21,22] are prevalent in most AT patient cells. In addition,
approximately one-third of AT patients develop cancer, which
is usually lymphoid[10].
Both NBS and ATLD cells share a number of cellular phenotypes
with AT cells, with the most prominent being the
increased sensitivity to ionizing radiation, abnormal cell-cycle
checkpoints, chromosome instability, immunodeficiency and
accelerated shortening of telomeres[41,42]. In particular, all 3
disorders show an increased level of chromosome translocation
in the peripheral blood between the loci of the immunoglobulin
and T-cell receptor genes on chromosomes 7 and
14[43,44]. Hence, laboratory findings are most consistent with
all 3 diseases belonging to a group of disorders referred to
chromosome instability syndromes.

Molecular basis of ataxia telangiectasia and
related diseases

AT is the result of mutations in the AT-mutated (ATM)
gene, which was discovered in 1995[45,46]. AT patients suffer
as a result of over 400 distinct ATM mutations, of which 85%
are accounted for by null mutations in the ATM gene[21,47,48].
Thus, approximately 85% of AT sufferers have no detectable
ATM protein[21,48]. There are a few reported genuine AT cases
with normal ATM protein levels; however, in these cases the
protein is defective in ATM enzyme activity[49,50]. The establishment
of AT as a monogenetic disease assisted in efficient
diagnosis and reevaluation of “AT variants”. The fact
that some AT patients carry hypomorphic ATM mutations
(ie mutations with partial functions) provides an underlying
explanation for atypical AT patients with minimal signs of
symptoms, such as very mild or late-onset of syndromes or
a subset of disorders[51].
The ATM protein is a member of the phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase-like family of serine/threonine protein kinases
(PIKK)[13,52]. It is thus grouped because all PIKK contain a
conserved kinase domain initially reported in phosphatidylinositol
3-kinase. This family represents an atypical subclass
of protein kinases responsible for phosphorylation of
its substrates on serine or threonine followed by glutamine
Http://www.chinaphar.com Ball LG et al

899

(SQ or TQ)[53–55]. The mammalian PIKK known to be involved
in the DNA damage response are: DNA-PKcs (the catalytic
subunit of DNA-dependent protein kinase), ATM (ataxia telangiectasia
gene product), ATR (ATM and Rad3-related),
mTOR/FRAP (mammalian target of rapamycin/FKBPrapamycin-associated
protein) and ATX/SMG1[13].
The ATM protein is a fairly large (approximately 350 kDa)
protein that can be divided into several structural and functional
domains (Figure 1A). The first is an FAT domain, which
is conserved among the PIKK family of proteins FRAP, ATR
and TRRAP; the second is a phosphoinositide 3,4-kinase
(PI3K) domain, which ATM has in common with DNA-PKcs;
and the third is an FAT carboxy-terminal domain (FATC)[56].
In addition, the amino terminus of the ATM protein contains
multiple HEAT (huntingtin, elongation factor 3, A subunit of
protein phosphatase 2A and TOR1) repeats[57]. A recent
solution structure analysis of the FATC domain[58] revealed
an a-helix and a disulfide-bonded loop that undergoes conformational
changes. Hence, the FATC domain may regulate
protein activity and stability. The precise function of HEAT
repeats is currently unknown, although it is speculated to be
involved in the interaction with other proteins, as these repeats
are anti-parallel α-helices linked by a flexible loop[40,57].

The overall shape of ATM is very similar to DNA-PKcs and
is comprised of a head and a long arm that is thought to wrap
around double-stranded DNA after a conformational change[59–63].
One of the hallmarks of the ATM protein is its rapid increase
in kinase activity immediately following exposure to ionizing
radiation (IR), or in the presence of double-strand breaks
(DSB)[64,65].
The gene mutated in NBS was identified as NBS1[25,66,67]
whereas ATLD is caused by mutations in the MRE11 gene[29].
Unlike AT, which can result from complete inactivation of
the coding gene, all NBS and ATLD patients carry hypomorphic
mutations that express some level of corresponding
protein, either truncated or full length with amino acid substitutions[27,68].
Indeed, attempts to create null Mre11 mutations
in mouse embryonic stem cells has failed and conditional
knockout experiments demonstrated that this gene is
required for normal cell proliferation[69], suggesting that
MRE11 is an essential gene in mammals. Similarly, complete
Nbs1 knockout mice are embryonic lethal[70,71]. This assertion
is further confirmed by a report that disruption of mouse
Rad50, encoding the third component of the MRN (MRX in
yeast) complex consisting of Mre11, Rad50, and Nbs1 (aka
nibrin and p95; Xrs2 in yeast), also causes embryonic stem

Figure 1. Schematic representation of the ATM, Mre11 and Nbs1 proteins. (A) ATM and its functional domains. Most domains have been
discussed in the text. The letter “P” indicates the phosphorylation site required for its activation. (B) Mre11 and its functional domains. The
asterisks represent the known mutations that cause ataxia telangiectasia-like disorder (ATLD). Note that only two families of ATLD with
MRE11 mutations were reported. One is homozygous for the mutation C1897T, resulting in R633∆ (stop codon), whereas the second family
is heterozygous for A350G (N117S) and C1714T (R572∆). (C) Nbs1 and its functional domains. The asterisks indicate the known NBS1
mutations that cause Nijmegan breakage syndrome (NBS), among which the homozygous 657∆5 mutation accounts for over 90% of NBS
patients. 657∆5 contains a 5-bp deletion, resulting in a truncated 26 kDa protein with only forkhead-associated (FHA) and BRCA1 Cterminus
(BRCT) domains. Other NBS1 mutations cause various degrees of symptoms.
900

Ball LG et al Acta Pharmacologica Sinica ISSN 1671-4083

cell lethality[72].
The human MRE11 gene was initially isolated by its possible
protein interaction with DNA ligase I[73] and was predicted
to encode a 708-amino acid protein. However, subsequent
reports appear to favor an Mre11B sequence (Figure
1B), which is different from Mre11 primarily at the C-terminal
region and significantly strengthens its similarity with Mre11
from other species[74]. Mre11 contains a phosphoesterase
motif at the N-terminal region that is highly conserved among
all eukaryotic Mre11 and a similar motif is also found in
Escherichia coli SbcD[75]. It also contains DNA-binding
domains at the C-terminal region and region(s) for homodimerization[76,77].
Structural analyses[78–80] indicate that the
MRN complex consists of two molecules of Mre11 and Rad50
(an E coli SbcC homolog) forming a rope-and-hook structure
capable of bridging two DSB ends. In vitro characterization
of the Rad50–Mre11 complex[76,81–84] demonstrates that
it possesses 3´ to 5´ exonuclease and single-strand endonuclease
activities, as well as ATP-dependent DNA binding
and limited unwinding activity.
The phenotypic similarity between NBS and ATLD patients
is attributed to the fact that both corresponding proteins
are components of the MRN complex. Mre11 interacts
with both Rad50 and Nbs1/Xrs2, and its homodimerization
or self-interaction appears to be important for the Mre11–
Rad50 and Mre11–Nbs1/Xrs2 interactions[76,77]. Interestingly,
deficiency of the Mre11 protein results in decreased cellular
levels of Nbs1 and Rad50, suggesting that the MRN complex
is required for protein stability. The primary cellular
function of MRN is a sensor for DNA strand breaks and to
activate signaling pathways leading to cell-cycle checkpoint
and recombination repair[32,85,86]. While Mre11 and Rad50
are highly conserved in eukaryotes, from unicellular yeasts
to human cells[87,88], the third component, Nbs1, is less conserved
structurally among eukaryotes, although the mammalian
Nbs1 and yeast Xrs2 play similar roles within their
respective MRN/MRX complex. Nbs1 has been suggested
to be a regulatory subunit of MRN that is essential for Mre11
phosphorylation upon DNA damage[89] and its biochemical
activities, such as ATP-dependent DNA unwinding and nuclease
activity[90]. Although Nbs1 or Xrs2 is not required for
the Mre11–Rad50 enzymatic activity in vitro, its activity appears
to be absolutely required for MRX activity in vivo, as
inactivation of any 1 of the 3 genes in yeast cells leads to
complete loss of the MRX activity and indistinguishable
cellular phenotypes[91–93]. This essential function of Nbs1/
Xrs2 is probably due to its role in recruiting ATM/Tel1[94].
The Nbs1 protein has 4 known functional regions: the Nterminal
forkhead-associated (FHA) domain followed by a

BRCA1 C-terminus (BRCT) domain, a C-terminal Mre11-binding
domain and an ATM-binding domain at the extreme Cterminus
(Figure 1C). Interestingly, over 90% of all NBS patients
analyzed to date contain a homozygous 5 bp truncating
mutation, 657∆5[25], resulting in the production of a 26-
kDa protein with FHA and BRCT domains but lacking the
Mre11-binding domain (Figure 1C). Knockout mice producing
similar truncated Nbs1 proteins are viable and develop
symptoms characteristic of the human disease[95,96], thus providing
an animal model suitable for NBS research.

Phenotypic manifestation of genetic defects
in ataxia telangiectasia and related diseases

One of the hallmarks of the ATM protein is its rapid increase
in kinase activity immediately following DSB formation[64,65],
and its kinase activity remains its only known function
to date. The phenotypic manifestation of AT is due to
the broad range of substrates for the ATM kinase, as compiled
recently[40], involving DNA repair, apoptosis, G1/S, intra-S
checkpoint and G2/M checkpoints, gene regulation,
translation initiation, and telomere maintenance. Protein
phosphorylation and de-phosphorylation is an important
cellular regulatory mechanism that governs protein activity,
stability, subcellular location and complex formation. We
propose that although the primary ATM kinase substrates
appear to be related to cellular response to DNA damage,
novel ATM substrates and subsequent effects may explain
all observed syndromes of AT patients, including elevated
AFP level. We also propose that the multiple HEAT repeats
in ATM may serve as a platform to interact with various
regulatory and substrate proteins and to control its kinase
activity in the aftermath of DNA damage. For example, the
increased risk for breast cancer in AT patients has been implicated
by the involvement of ATM in the interaction and
phosphorylation of BRCA1 and its associated proteins following
DNA damage[97,98].
The ATM protein also has the ability to interact with the
ends of double-stranded DNA[99]. A recent model suggests
that ATM is in an inactive dimeric or polymeric configuration,
in which the kinase domain of each molecule is blocked by
the FAT domain of the other[100]. Following DNA damage,
each ATM molecule phosphorylates the other on a serine
residue at position 1981 within the FAT domain and thus
converts into fully active monomers. It was shown that protein
serine-threonine phosphatase 5 (PP5) is required for the
activation of ATM and its subsequent kinase activity[101].
The symptom similarity among AT, ATLD and NBS is
apparently due to physical and genetic interactions between
Http://www.chinaphar.com Ball LG et al

901

ATM and MRN. Experimental results suggest that the ATMMRN
interaction in response to IR is complicated. First, the
histone H2A isoform H2AX is rapidly phosphorylated (within
5 min) after irradiation in an ATM-dependent manner[102,103],
and the phosphorylated gH2AX interacts with MRN via the
FHA/BRCT region of Nbs1[103]. This interaction has been
deemed indispensable for the recruitment of MRN[41]. Second,
in response to IR, ATM phosphorylates Nbs1 in vivo[104],
which is required for the subsequent phosphorylation of
Mre11. Finally, phosphorylation and activation of the Sphase
checkpoint effector Smc1 by ATM requires phosphorylated
Nbs1[105,106]. The above observations suggest that
ATM acts upstream of MRN and is required to recruit MRN
to the damage sites observed as distinct nuclear foci. On the
other hand, MRN/MRX is known to bind DSB ends and a
careful choreographic analysis in yeast[107] indicates that
MRX localization to nuclear DSB foci precedes and is required
for that of Tel1, a yeast ATM ortholog[108,109]. In mammalian
cells, Mre11 appears to be required for ATM activation
as well[110], and this interaction was further reinforced
very recently by an in vitro experiment showing that the
MRN complex acts as a DSB sensor for ATM and recruits
ATM to broken DNA molecules[111]. Interestingly, the unwinding
of DNA ends by MRN appears to be essential for
ATM stimulation[111], indicating that the MRN enzymatic
activity plays a role in this process. In addition, a recent
study[112] shows that NFBD/MDC1, which interacts with
MRN, is required for ATM activation under certain
conditions. Alternatively, NFBD1/MDC1 may help to recruit
substrates, including Nbs1[113,114], to ATM[113–123]; suppression
of NFBD1/MDC1 leads to decreased ATM activation
and decreased phosphorylation of ATM substrates[112].
These observations support an assertion that MRN plays a
crucial role in ATM phosphorylation of other substrates in
response to DSB. The argument that MRN functions upstream
of ATM is further strengthened by a very recent report
that the extreme C-terminal 21 amino acid peptide of
Nbs1 is required and sufficient for the interaction with ATM
in vivo and in vitro, and that this interaction mediates ATM
deposition to the sites of DNA damage and its checkpoint
functions[94]. The above genetic and physical interactions
between MRN and ATM underlie the molecular basis for the
shared cellular functions in cell-cycle checkpoints and recombination
repair of DSB, as well as common syndromes
among AT, ATLD and NBS.

DNA-PK: a missing link?

Despite the great advances made in the past decade regarding
AT research, many questions remain to be answered.
One question that remains unsolved is the involvement of
Ku70/Ku80 in ATM-mediated cellular events in response to
DSB. Ku70 and Ku80 form a heterodimer as DNA end-binding
subunits of DNA-PK[59–62]. It would be plausible to suggest
that Ku70/Ku80 may also assist ATM’s translocation
to DSB, as Ku70/Ku80 is known to play such a role for DNAPKcs,
another member of PIKK with overall structural similarity
to ATM[124]. Like ATM, DNA-PKcs recognizes the same
consensus phosphorylation sequence SQ/TQ, and also undergoes
DSB-induced autophosphorylation, which is required
for DSB repair[125]. In addition, inactivation of either
DNA-PK or ATM results in immunodeficiency; the former
results in defective V(D)J recombination that leads to scid
(severe combined immune deficiency) mutations[126,127],
whereas the latter results in the disruption of immune gene
rearrangement[128]. We propose that in the presence of Ku70/
Ku80, DNA-PKcs and ATM may undergo conformational
changes to be suitable for the suggested role of further wrapping
around DNA[59–63]. Indeed, recent electron microscopybased
structural analyses of both DNA-PKcs[129–131] and
ATM[63] suggest a similar architecture consisting of a “head”
and a “palm” domain connected by an “arm”. The palm
domain binds DNA, which induces conformational changes
and triggers an interaction between initially distant palm and
head regions[130]. These DNA-induced conformational
changes alter the catalytic core and regulate the kinase activity[131].
The difference between DNA-PKcs and ATM is
that DNA-PKcs is activated in G1 and is required for nonhomologous
end joining (NHEJ) and apoptosis if DNA damage
is excessive[132], while ATM is activated in S and G2
phases and is required for S-phase checkpoint and homologous
recombination (HR)[40].
Another connection between ATM and Ku70/Ku80 is
that yeast MRX is not only required for DSB signaling and
HR, but also works with Ku70/Ku80 for NHEJ[133–136] and telomere
maintenance[77,93,137,138]. The budding yeast Saccaromyces
cerevisiae predominantly employs HR to repair DSB
over NHEJ. On some occasions when DSB repair can be
processed by either process, NHEJ was shown to precede
HR[139]. A compiled model can be proposed in which the
telomere acts as a repository for Ku proteins, which relocalize
to DSB after DNA damage[140] and recruit MRX[141]. MRX
can assist to recruit and activate Lif1 and Dnl4[142], resulting
in ligation of the broken ends. However, in budding yeast, the
MRX complex most likely initiates 5´ to 3´ end resection[76],
hence committing to repair by HR. This commitment is probably
due to the broken DSB ends that are unsuitable for
direct ligation, or to the recruitment of Tel1 by MRX that
902

Ball LG et al Acta Pharmacologica Sinica ISSN 1671-4083

activates cell-cycle checkpoints and subsequent recruitment
of other HR proteins[107]. A similar regulatory cascade may
also exist in higher eukaryotes; however, because mammalian
cells have an extended G1 phase, the initial DSB binding
by Ku70/Ku80 may stimulate NHEJ more frequently than in
yeast. In addition, mammalian cells contain 3 major PIKK
family proteins, namely ATM, ATR and DNA-PKcs, involved
in different modes of DNA repair and overlapping signal
transduction in response to DNA damage. The mechanism
of their recruitment to sites of DNA damage is conserved via
a newly discovered motif[94]. For example, ATR is recruited
to a single-stranded DNA by ATRIP (ATR-interacting
protein)[143,144], whereas DNA-PKcs and ATM are recruited
to DSB by Ku70/K80 and MRN, respectively. Based on the
above observations, we have proposed a working model of
cellular response to DSB in mammals, as presented in Figure 2.
Finally, the physical and functional interactions among
Ku, MRN/MRX and ATM/Tel1 can also be found in
telomeres. Both yeast[145] and human[146] Ku is bound to

telomeric DNA and protects its 3´ overhang. The MRX complex
in budding yeast is also associated with telomeres, and
mutants deficient in Ku or MRX activity exhibit telomere
shortening[137,147]. Similar phenotypes are also observed in
their homologous mutants in fission yeast and plants[148–150].
Tel1 works together with MRX by either regulating the access
of telomerase to the DNA end[151], and/or preventing
telomere end-to-end fusion[152]. Tel1 is activated by the MRX
complex and in turn phosphorylates MRX[153], suggesting
functional conservation between yeast and mammals.
However, unlike Tel1, ATM has not been implicated in
telomerase access to the telomere. Nevertheless, AT patient
cells were shown to have shortened telomeres[39,154], as well
as other telomere abnormalities[155,156]. Furthermore,
transgenic mice defective in both ATM and telomerase dramatically
increase telomere dysfunction compared to single
mutants[157], suggesting roles of ATM in telomere
maintenance. The telomeric functions of ATM may be related
to some symptoms of AT patients.

Figure 2. A proposed model for cellular response to DNA double-stranded breaks (DSB) in mammalian cells. The Ku70/Ku80 heterodimer
binds to the broken DNA ends first, followed by the recruitment or the independent binding of the MRN complex (consisting of Mre11, Rad50
and Nbs1). If DNA-PKcs is recruited by interacting with the C-terminus of Ku80, cells are committed to non-homologous end joining. On the
other hand, if ATM is recruited by interacting with the C-terminus of Nbs1, Ku70/Ku80 may be released and cells are probably committed to
homologous recombination repair. Recruitment of ATM also leads to substrate phosphorylation and cell-cycle checkpoints. It should be noted
that MRN may also bind to DNA ends without the assistance of Ku70/Ku80. Recent literature suggests that unwinding of DNA ends by MRN
activates ATM and cell-cycle checkpoints, whereas DNA end resection by MRN initiates homologous recombination. The 2 processes may be
co-regulated.
Http://www.chinaphar.com Ball LG et al

903

Conclusions

Since the initial discovery of the AT mutated gene 10
years ago, knowledge regarding the molecular mechanisms
of AT and its related diseases has accumulated rapidly. It is
now clear that the primary function of ATM and MRN, which
is related to NBS and ATLD, is to respond to DNA damage,
especially DSB. Two primary activities are cell-cycle checkpoint
and DNA repair through HR, and these are achieved
mainly via protein phosphorylation of various substrates,
including ATM and MRN themselves. ATM and MRN are
also involved in telomere maintenance and protection from
chromosomal translocation, as well as efficient immune gene
recombination. Although these cellular phenotypes are able
to explain most phenotypes observed in AT and AT-related
disease, some other associated symptoms may be due to
diverse ATM substrates, unique MRN functions not shared
by ATM, as well as the hypomorphic nature of the disease.
Despite great advances in research, many questions remain
to be answered especially with regard to treatment. Future
efforts shall be directed to translational research for the cure
and prevention of AT its and related diseases.

Acknowledgements

The authors wish to thank Michelle HANNA for proofreading
the manuscript and other laboratory members for
their helpful discussion. This work is supported by a Canadian
Institutes of Health Research operating grant (MOP53240)
to WX.

