Minichromosome maintenance protein 5 homologue in Caenorhabditis elegans plays essential role for postembryonic development

Abstract
Genome duplication is tightly controlled in multicellular organisms to ensure the genome stability. Studies in Saccharomyces cerevisiae and Xenopus show that minichromosome maintenance (MCM) proteins are essential for genome duplication. However, the development role of MCM proteins in multicellular organisms is not well known. MCM5 encodes a member of the MCM2–7 protein family involved in the initiation of DNA replication. The sequences of all Mcm5 homologues from yeast to human are highly conserved and suggest that their functions are also conserved. Here, we isolated the first mutant allele of mcm-5 (fw7) in Caenorhabditis elegans. Homozygous mcm-5 (fw7) mutants from heterozygous parents exhibited variable larval lethality and adult sterility. The postembryonically born neuron number was decreased and also showed aberrant axon morphology. Our study revealed that the losses of neurons in mcm-5 (fw7) mutants were caused by cell cycle defects not by programmed cell death. The examination showed that mcm-5 was widely used for postembryonic development in multiple cells such as seam cells, gonad and intestinal cells. Knockdown of mcm-5 by RNAi caused 98.1% embryonic arrest, suggesting that mcm-5 was also required for embryonic development. After RNAi treatment of the other MCM2–7 family members, we found that they all exhibited similar phenotypes as mcm-5, suggesting that the MCM2–7 family in C. elegans might function associated with cell division as its homologues in S. cerevisiae.

Discussion
In this paper, we report the isolation of the first mutant allele of mcm-5 and its developmental study in C. elegans. Although not all postembryonic cell lineages were examined, it had revealed that the majority, if not all, of postembryonic cell proliferation were defective. It indicated that mcm-5 was widely used for postembryonic development. Moreover, the examination of RNAi experiment suggests that mcm-5 was also required for embryonic development. To exclude the possibility of the cell...