Abstract. The tumor suppressor protein p53 restricts
proliferation in response to DNA damage or the deregulation
of mitogenic oncogenes, by leading to the induction of
various cell cycle checkpoints, apoptosis or cellular
senescence. Consequently, p53 mutations increase cell
proliferation and survival and in some settings promote
genomic instability and resistance to certain anti-cancer drugs.
It is very important to identify chemotherapeutic agents that
activate in a p53-independent manner for the development of
treatments for p53-deficient tumors. Pectenotoxin-2 (PTX-2),
isolated from marine sponges has been reported to display
significant cytotoxicity to p53-deficient cancer cell lines. In
this study, we compared the anti-cancer activity of PTX-2 in
order to further test the status of p53 using two well-known
hepatocarcinoma cell lines, p53-deficient Hep3B and p53-
wild-type HepG2. MTT assay indicated that Hep3B cells were
highly susceptible, whereas HepG2 cells were more resistant
to this compound which was connected with the induction of
apoptotic cell death in p53-deficient Hep3B cells, though not
in HepG2 cells. The apoptosis induced by PTX-2 in Hep3B
cells was associated with the down-regulation of antiapoptotic
Bcl-2 members (Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL) and IAP family
proteins, the up-regulation of pro-apoptotic Bax protein and

tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand
(TRAIL)-receptor 1/receptor 2 (DR4/DR5) and mitochondrial
dysfunction. PTX-2 activated caspases (caspase-3,
-8 and -9) and the blockade of caspase-3 activity by the
caspase-3 inhibitor prevented the PTX-2-induced apoptosis in
Hep3B cells. Additionally, the transcription factor early
growth response-1 (Egr-1) gene was transcriptionally
activated and the levels of non-steroidal anti-inflammatory
drugs (NSAID)-activated gene-1 (NAG-1) protein were also
elevated in PTX-2-treated Hep3B cells. Although further
studies are needed to prove that an increased expression of
Egr-1 by PTX-2 directly leads to NAG-1 induction and then
apoptosis induction in p53-deficient Hep3B cells, the results
of this study suggest that PTX-2 may be a good candidate for
the development of a potential anti-tumorigenic agent in p53-
deficient tumors.

Introduction

Apoptosis (programmed cell death), plays an important role
in regulating the number of cells during development in the
homeostatic cell turnover in adults and in many other settings.
However, most cancer cells can block apoptosis, which allows
them to survive despite the genetic and morphologic
transformations. Apoptotic cells are characterized by several
unique features, including cell shrinkage, chromatin
condensation, DNA fragmentation, cell surface expression of
phosphatidylserine and membrane blebbing (1-3). In general,
apoptosis can be initiated in two ways: by an extrinsic or
intrinsic pathway. Depending on the nature of the substance
and the type of cells, apoptosis may take place via either
pathway. In the former case, plasma membrane death
receptors are involved. The apoptosis signal is provided by the
interaction between the ligand and death receptor. Changes in
the mitochondrial integrity by a broad range of physical and
chemical stimuli, however, can trigger the intrinsic pathway of

ONCOLOGY REPORTS 19: 517-526, 2008 517

Induction of apoptosis by pectenotoxin-2 is mediated with
the induction of DR4/DR5, Egr-1 and NAG-1, activation of
caspases and modulation of the Bcl-2 family in p53-deficient
Hep3B hepatocellular carcinoma cells

DONG YEOK SHIN1,2, GI YOUNG KIM3, NAM DEUK KIM4, JEE HYUNG JUNG4,
SE-KWON KIM5
, HO SUNG KANG2 and YUNG HYUN CHOI1,6

1Department of Biochemistry, Dongeui University College of Oriental Medicine, Busan 614-052; 2Department of Molecular
Biology, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735; 3Faculty of Applied Marine Science, Cheju National University,
Jeju 690-756; 4Department of Pharmacy and Pusan Cancer Research Center, Pusan National University, Busan 609-735;
5Department of Chemistry and Marine Bioprocess Research Center, Pukyong National University, Busan 608-737;
6Department of Biomaterial Control (BK21 program), Dongeui University Graduate School, Busan 614-052, Korea

Received September 27, 2007; Accepted November 21, 2007

_________________________________________

Correspondence to: Dr Yung Hyun Choi, Department of
Biochemistry, Dongeui University College of Oriental Medicine,
Busan 614-052, Korea
E-mail: choiyh@deu.ac.kr

Key words: pectenotoxin-2, hepatocellular carcinoma, p53,
apoptosis

517-526 9/1/08 14:36 Page 517
apoptosis (4-6). Besides the morphological and biological
changes, other biomarkers and events could also be used for
the precise determination of the type of apoptosis.
Accumulating data indicate that many chemopreventive
and/or chemotherapeutic agents can cause tumor cell death
through the induction of apoptosis, which is the preferred
way of managing cancer. Therefore, the induction of
apoptotic cell death is an important mechanism in the anticancer
properties of many anti-cancer drugs.
The tumor suppressor p53 gene plays a major role in
preventing tumorigenesis, by responding to both cellular stress
and DNA damage and the mutation of p53 is frequently
associated with oncogenesis (7,8). Intracellular concentrations
of p53 are robustly increased by stresses such as DNA
damage, ionizing radiation, UV radiation, hypoxia, growth
factor withdrawal, oncogene activation and exposure to
cytotoxic agents (8,9). Numerous studies have demonstrated
that p53 directly activates the transcription of a number of
genes including cyclin-dependent kinase inhibitor p21
(WAF1/CIP1), the major mediator of p53 cell-cycle
inhibitory capacity and the apoptotic genes (9,10). However,
it is not yet completely understood how the activation of p53
initiates apoptosis. In some cell lines, its activation leads to
the induction of pro-apoptotic Bax expression, which allows
the release of sequestered pro-apoptotic proteins and
subsequent permeabilization of the outer mitochondrial
membrane (11,12). Pro-apoptotic Bax also antagonizes antiapoptotic
Bcl-2 and other anti-apoptotic molecules,
facilitating apoptosis through this pathway. Thus, it is very
important to point out that even p53-lacking cells undergo
apoptosis when treated with some drugs, leading to the
possibility that several other mechanisms may be taking
place that need to be identified. For example, cell lines derived
from hepatocellular carcinoma, such as Hep3B, have been
shown to have mutations in the p53 gene (13), making them
highly insensitive to drugs that act through p53-dependent
apoptosis pathways. The opposite is observed in hepatoma
cells such as HepG2, which have no reported mutations in
p53 (14), being at least in this aspect, closer to normal
hepatocytes and are a useful model for studies on chemotherapeutic
drugs.
Previous studies indicate that marine organisms are proving
to be a novel and rich source of bioactive compounds due to
their potential pharmacological activities. Among them,
marine sponges have been used as a main source for this study
of hitherto unknown biological activities of natural marine
products (15,16). Investigations into components of marine
organisms have proven that many are not general cytotoxic
agents, but rather are targeted towards specific cellular or
biochemical events and therefore hold strong potential as
anti-microbial, anti-cancer or anti-inflammatory agents (17-19).
Through the screening of marine natural compounds that
inhibit cancer cell proliferation, we previously reported that
pectenotoxin-2 (PTX-2) isolated from marine sponges,
Poecillastra sp. and Jaspis sp., exhibited selective cytotoxicity
against several cell lines (20) and activated an intrinsic
pathway of apoptosis in p53-deficient tumor cells compared to
those with functional p53 both in vitro and in vivo (21).
However, the molecular mechanisms of its anti-proliferative
action on malignant cell growth are not completely known. To

further explore the mechanism of its anti-cancer activity and to
test whether the status of p53 in liver cancer cells correlates
with their chemosensitivities to PTX-2, we chose two wellknown
hepatocarcinoma cell lines, p53-deficient HepG2 and
p53-wild-type Hep3B. Our study revealed that Hep3B cells
were much more susceptible to PTX-2 than HepG2 cells,
which was connected with the induction of apoptotic cell death
in Hep3B cells, though not in HepG2 cells. The apoptosis
induced by PTX-2 in Hep3B cells was associated with the
modulation of the Bcl-2 family, activation of caspases and
loss of mitochondrial membrane potential (MMP, ΔΨm).
PTX-2 also activated the transcription factor early growth
response-1 (Egr-1) gene expression in a transcriptional level
and induced the tumor necrosis factor-related apoptosisinducing
ligand (TRAIL)-receptor 1/receptor 2 (DR4/DR5)
and the nonsteroidal anti-inflammatory drugs (NSAID)-
activated gene-1 (NAG-1).

Materials and methods

Cell culture and cell viability assay. Human hepatocarcinoma
HepG2 and Hep3B cells were purchased from the American
Type Culture Collection (Rockville, MD, USA). Both cell
lines were cultured in Dulbecco's modified Eagle's medium
(DMEM) containing 100 units/ml penicillin/streptomycin and
supplemented with 10% heat-inactivated fetal bovine serum
(FBS, Gibco BRL, Gaithersburg, MD, USA) at 37˚C and 5%
CO2. PTX-2 was prepared as described previously (20) and
dissolved in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) as a stock solution at
1 mg/ml concentration and stored in aliquots at -20˚C.
Measurement of cell viability was determined using the 3-(4,5-
dimethylthiazol-2-yl)-2,5-diphenyl-tetrazolium bromide
(MTT, Sigma Chemical Co., St. Louis, MO, USA) assay,
which is based on the conversion of MTT to MTT-formazan
by mitochondrial enzyme.

Measurement of apoptosis by annexin-V FITC and PI double
staining. The magnitude of the apoptosis elicited by PTX-2
treatment was determined using an Annexin-V fluorescein
isothiocyanate (FITC) apoptosis detection kit (BD
Pharmingen, San Diego, CA, USA). Briefly, the cells were
washed with phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) and resuspended
in annexin-V-binding buffer containing 10 mM
HEPES/NaOH, pH 7.4, 140 mM NaCl and 2.5 mM CaCl2,
according to the manufacturer's protocol. Aliquots of the cells
were incubated with annexin-V FITC, mixed and incubated
for 15 min at room temperature in the dark. Propidium
iodide (PI) at a concentration of 5 μg/ml was added to
identify the necrotic cells. The apoptotic cells (V+/PI-
) were
measured by a fluorescence-activated cell sorter analysis in
flow cytometry (Becton Dickinson, San Jose, CA, USA).

Nuclear staining with DAPI. After treating the cells with
PTX-2 for the indicated times, the cells were harvested,
washed in ice-cold PBS and fixed with 3.7% paraformaldehyde
(Sigma) in PBS for 10 min at room temperature. The fixed cells
were washed with PBS and stained with a 4,6-diamidino-2-
phenylindile (DAPI) solution for 10 min at room temperature.
The cells were washed two more times with PBS and analyzed
via a fluorescent microscope (Carl Zeiss, Germany).

SHIN et al: INDUCTION OF APOPTOSIS BY PECTENOTOXIN-2 518

517-526 9/1/08 14:36 Page 518
RNA extraction and reverse transcription-PCR. The total RNA
was prepared using an RNeasy kit (Qiagen, La Jolla, CA,
USA) and primed with random hexamers to synthesize the
complementary DNA using AMV reverse transcriptase
(Amersham Corp., Arlington Heights, IL, USA) according to
the manufacturer's instructions. A polymerase chain reaction
(PCR) was carried out using a Mastercycler (Eppendorf,
Hamburg, Germany) with the primers. The primer sequences
were as follows: Egr-1 forward (5'-CCC TAA GCT GGA
GGA GAT GAT G-3'), Egr-1 reverse (5'-TCA TGC TCA
CTA GGC CAC TGA C-3'), glyceraldehyde-3-phosphate
dehydrogenase (GAPDH) forward (5'-CGG AGT CAA CGG
ATT TGG TCG TAT-3') and GAPDH reverse (5'-AGC CTT
CTC CAT GGT GGT GAA GAC-3'). The following
conditions were used for the PCR reactions: 1 x (94˚C for
3 min); 35 x (94˚C for 45 sec; 58˚C for 45 sec; and 72˚C for
1 min) and 1 x (72˚C for 10 min). The amplification products
obtained by PCR were separated electrophoretically on a 1%
agarose gel and visualized by ethidium bromide (EtBr, Sigma)
staining.

Gel electrophoresis and Western blot analysis. The cells were
harvested, lysed and the protein concentrations were
quantified using a Bio-Rad protein assay (Bio-Rad Lab.,
Hercules, CA, USA), according to the procedure reported by
the manufacturer. For Western blot analysis, an equal amount
of protein was subjected to electrophoresis on SDSpolyacrylamide
gel and transferred to a nitrocellulose
membrane (Schleicher & Schuell, Keene, NH, USA) by
electroblotting. The blots were probed with the desired
antibodies for 1 h, incubated with the diluted enzyme-linked
secondary antibody and visualized by enhanced chemiluminescence
(ECL) according to the recommended procedure
(Amersham). The primary antibodies were purchased from
Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc. (Santa Cruz, CA, USA) and
Calbiochem (Cambridge, MA, USA). The peroxidase-labeled
donkey anti-rabbit immunoglobulin and peroxidase-labeled
sheep anti-mouse immunoglobulin were purchased from
Amersham.

Measurement of the loss of mitochondrial membrane
potential (MMP, ΔΨm). To measure the MMP, the dualemission
potential-sensitive probe, 5,5 V, 6,6 V-tetrachloro-1,1
V,3,3 V-tetraethyl-imidacarbocyanine iodide (JC-1, Sigma),
was used. After treatment with PTX-2, the cells were scraped
from the bottom of the wells and aliquots of 5x105 cells were
placed into FACS tubes. Cells were then stained with 2 mg/l
JC-1 at 37˚C for 20 min and then analyzed using flow
cytometry (Becton Dickinson).

Measurement of caspase activity. The enzymatic activities of
the caspases induced by PTX-2 were assayed using
colorimetric assay kits according to the manufacturer's
protocol (R&D Systems, Minneapolis, MN, USA). Briefly,
the cells were lysed in a lysis buffer for 30 min on an ice bath.
The lysed cells were centrifuged at 12,000 x g for 10 min
and 100 μg of the protein was incubated with 50 μl of a
reaction buffer and 5 μl of the colorimetric tetrapeptides, AspGlu-Val-Asp
(DEVD)-p-nitroaniline (pNA) for caspase-3, IleGlu-Thr-Asp
(IETD)-pNA for caspase-8 and Leu-Glu-His-Asp

(LEHD)-pNA for caspase-9, respectively, at 37˚C for 2 h. The
optical density of the reaction mixture was quantified
spectrophotometrically at a wavelength of 405 nm.

Transfections and luciferase assay for the detection of Egr-1
activity. The human Egr-1 promoter-containing plasmids were
generously provided by Dr K.W. Kim (College of Pharmacy,
Seoul National University, Korea) (22). For transfection, in
brief, cells were plated onto 6-well plates at a density of 3x105
cells/well. The cells were washed twice with a serum-free
Optimem medium (Gibco BRL) and then 500 μl of fresh
serum-free medium was added. The plasmid/polymer complex
was added to each dish and then incubated for 10 h at 37˚C in
a 5% CO2 incubator. After 10 h, 1 ml of fresh Optimem
medium containing 20% FBS was added to each well and
treated with 10 ng/ml PTX-2 for the indicated times.
Luciferase activity was measured using a TD-20/20
luminometer (Turner Designs Instrument Co., San Francisco,
CA, USA).

Results

Inhibition of cell viability by PTX-2 in p53-deficient Hep3B
cells. We used an MTT assay to evaluate the anti-proliferative
activity of PTX-2 on HepG2 and Hep3B cells and found
that p53-deficient Hep3B cells were much more susceptible
than HepG2 cells, which contain wild-type p53 (Fig. 1A).
After 24 h of treatment with 10 ng/ml PTX-2 (no toxic effect
was observed after 8 h in both cell lines), most HepG2 cells
were viable, whereas Hep3B showed ~50% of viability.
When treated with 10 ng/ml PTX-2 for 36 and 48 h
incubation, the cell viability of Hep3B was 20 and 8%,
respectively. However, there was no significant inhibition
effect on HepG2 cells. Additionally, treated Hep3B cells with
PTX-2 were rounded up and more dispersed without
aggregation in a time-dependent manner. In contrast, there was
no markedly morphological change in PTX-2 treated HepG2
cells (Fig. 1C).

Induction of apoptosis by PTX-2 in p53-deficient Hep3B cells.
To investigate whether the viability decrease in Hep3B cells
was due to the induction of apoptosis, nuclear morphology of
PTX-2-treated cells was analyzed with DAPI staining. As
shown in Fig. 1D, the nuclei of Hep3B cells, but not in HepG2
cells, exposed to PTX-2 exhibited condensed and fragmented
chromatin and the effects were dose-dependent. Therefore,
flow cytometry analysis with annexin V and PI staining was
used to determine the magnitude of apoptosis elicited by
PTX-2. As shown in Fig. 1B, the annexin V-positive cells
were increased time-dependently in the PTX-2-treated Hep3B
cells compared with the untreated control cells. Hep3B cells
treated with 10 ng/ml PTX for 36 and 48 h, the apoptosis
was 25 and 30%, respectively, however, there was no
significant increase in HepG2 cells (Fig. 1B). These results
demonstrated that the cytotoxic effects observed in response to
PTX-2 are associated with the induction of apoptotic cell death
in p53-deficient Hep3B cells.

Modulation of Bcl-2 and IAP family proteins by PTX-2 in
p53-deficient Hep3B cells. To elucidate mechanisms

ONCOLOGY REPORTS 19: 517-526, 2008 519

517-526 9/1/08 14:36 Page 519
underlying PTX-2-induced apoptosis, we investigated the
levels of Bcl-2 and IAP family proteins by Western blotting.
When Hep3B cells were treated with PTX-2, a clear decrease
in anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL protein expression was
observed in a time-dependent manner (Fig. 2). In the case of
pro-apoptotic protein Bax, there was a time-dependent upregulation
observed in Hep3B cells treated with PTX-2.
However, PTX-2 did not significantly affect the Bcl-2 family
proteins in HepG2 cells (Fig. 2). The levels of IAP family
proteins such as XIAP, cIAP-1 and cIAP-2 after PTX-2
treatment were down-regulated in Hep3B cells treated with
PTX-2 in a time-dependent manner. Though the XIAP
expression was slightly down-regulated by PTX-2 treatment,
we could not detect any change in either cIAP-1 or cIAP-2
HepG2 cells.

Activation of caspase by PTX-2 in p53-deficient Hep3B cells.
The expression levels and activities of caspase-3, -8 and -9 in
HepG2 and Hep3B cells that had been exposed to PTX-2 were
measured in order to determine if PTX-2-induced apoptosis is
associated with the activation of caspase. As shown in Fig. 3A,
Western blot data showed that the levels of pro-caspase-3, -8
and -9 proteins were slightly decreased or remained unchanged

in PTX-2-treated Hep3B cells. However, the levels of active
subunits of the caspase expression were increased in a timedependent
manner. In order to further quantify the proteolytic
activation of caspases in Hep3B cells, the lysates equalized for
protein from the cells treated with PTX-2 were assayed for
their activity using an in vitro assay with a colorimetric assay
kit. We found that PTX-2 caused a time-dependent increase
in proteolytic activities of caspases, especially caspase-3
(Fig. 3B). However, the expression levels and activities of
those caspases in the PTX-2-treated HepG2 cells were
relatively unaffected.

Inhibition of PTX-2-induced apoptosis by the caspase-3
inhibitor. In order to show that the activation of caspase-3 is
a key step in the PTX-2-induced end-stage apoptotic events in
Hep3B cells, cells were pretreated with z-DEVD-fmk (50 μM),
a cell-permeable caspase-3 inhibitor, for 1 h, followed by a
treatment with 10 ng/ml PTX-2 for 24 h. The blockade of the
caspase-3 activity by a pre-treatment of the cells with zDEVD-fmk
prevented the PTX-2-induced chromatin
condensation, inhibition of cell viability and increase in the
sub-G1 population suggesting that PTX-2-induced apoptosis is
associated with caspase-3 activation (Fig. 4).

SHIN et al: INDUCTION OF APOPTOSIS BY PECTENOTOXIN-2 520

Figure 1. Inhibition of cell viability and induction of apoptosis by pectenotoxin-2 (PTX-2) in p53-deficient hepatocarcinoma Hep3B cells. HepG2 and Hep3B
cells were seeded at an initial density of 2.5x105 cells per 60-mm plate, incubated for 24 h and treated with 10 ng/ml PTX-2 for the indicated times. (A) The
level of cell viability was measured using MTT assay. Each point represents the mean ± SD of three independent experiments. (B) The cells grown under the
same conditions as (A) were collected and stained with FITC-conjugated annexin-V and PI for flow cytometry analysis. The apoptotic cells were determined
by counting the % of annexin V(+), PI(-) cells and the % of annexin V(+), PI(+) cells. The results are expressed as the mean ± SD of three independent
experiments. (C) After incubation with 10 ng/ml PTX-2 for the indicated times, the cells were sampled and examined by an inverted microscope.
Magnification, x200. (D) The cells grown under the same conditions as (C) were fixed, stained with DAPI and the nuclear morphology was photographed
with fluorescence using a blue filter. Magnification, x400.

517-526 9/1/08 14:36 Page 520
ONCOLOGY REPORTS 19: 517-526, 2008 521

Figure 2. Effects of PTX-2 on the expression of Bcl-2 and IAP family proteins in HepG2 and Hep2B cells. The cells were incubated with 10 ng/ml PTX-2 for
the indicated times, lysed and equal amounts of proteins were then separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gels and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. The
membranes were probed with the indicated antibodies and detected by ECL. To confirm an equal loading, the blots were stripped of the bound antibodies and
reprobed with the anti-actin antibody.

Figure 3. Activation of caspases by PTX-2 in p53-deficient Hep3B cells. (A) After treatment with 10 ng/ml of PTX-2 for the indicated times, the cells were
lysed and the cellular proteins were separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gels and transferred into nitrocellulose membranes. The membranes were probed with
the anti-caspase-3, -8 and -9 antibodies. The proteins were visualized using an ECL detection system. Actin was used as the internal control. (B) The cell
lysates from the cells treated with PTX-2 were assayed for in vitro caspase-3, -8 and -9 activity using DEVD-pNA, IETD-pNA and LEHD-pNA, respectively,
as substrates. The released fluorescent products were measured. The results are expressed as the mean ± SD of three independent experiments.

517-526 9/1/08 14:36 Page 521
Loss of MMP by PTX-2 in p53-deficient Hep3B cells. In order
to determine whether PTX-2-induced apoptosis is associated
with the loss of MMP, we measured MMP in PTX-2-treated
HepG2 and Hep3B cells using a fluorescent cationic dye JC-1.
As shown in Fig. 5, the loss of MMP induced by PTX-2
increased in Hep3B cells after 8 h and the values of MMP
loss in Hep3B cells reached ~15-18% at 36 and 48 h,
respectively, evidencing the increased depolarization of the
MMP with increased PTX-2 treatment times. However, when
HepG2 cells were cultured with PTX-2, a significant
enhancement in PTX-2-induced loss of MMP was not noted.
These data indicated that PTX-2 induced mitochondrial
dysfunction, which eventually activated the caspase cascade
in the apoptosis signaling of p53-deficient Hep3B cells.

Activation of Egr-1 in PTX-2-treated p53-deficient Hep3B
cells. To investigate whether PTX-2-induced growth inhibition
and apoptosis is associated with Egr-1 activation, HepG2 and
Hep3B cells were treated with PTX-2 for various times and the
mRNA and protein levels were measured by RT-PCR and

SHIN et al: INDUCTION OF APOPTOSIS BY PECTENOTOXIN-2 522

Figure 4. Inhibition of PTX-2-induced apoptosis by caspase-3 inhibitor, z-DEVD-fmk, in Hep3B cells. (A) Hep3B cells were treated with z-DEVD-fmk (50 μM)
for 1 h before a challenge with 10 nM PTX-2 for 24 h. The cells were observed under inverted microscopy (magnification, x200) or stained with DAPI for 10 min
and photographed with a fluorescent microscope using a blue filter (magnification, x400). (B and C) The cells were grown under the same conditions as (A)
and evaluated for cell viability and the sub-G1 DNA content using MTT assay and a flow cytometer, respectively. The data are reported as a mean ± SD of
three independent experiments.

Figure 5. Effect of PTX-2 treatment on mitochondrial membrane potential
(MMP, ΔΨm) in HepG2 and Hep3B cells. Cells were treated with 10 ng/ml
PTX-2 for the indicated times to follow the extent of apoptosis by
determination of MMP using JC-1 reagent. Cells were analyzed on a
FACScan cytometer and the data shown are representative of three
independent experiments with similar findings. The results are expressed as
the mean ± SD of three independent experiments.

517-526 9/1/08 14:36 Page 522
Western blot analyses. As shown in Fig. 6A and B, PTX-2
induced the expression of Egr-1 mRNA and protein in Hep3B
cells, however, the temporal expression of mRNA and proteins
is different. Egr-1 mRNA is maximally induced within 4 h
after treatment with PTX-2 and levels then decline 8 to 48 h
after treatment, whereas the induction of Egr-1 protein
increases after the 8 h treatment period. It was also investigated
whether the effects of the PTX-2 on transactivation in cells
transfected with constructs containing the Egr-1 promoter
insert. As shown in Fig. 6C, PTX-2 treatment induced
transactivation in only Hep3B cells transfected with Egr-1 in
a time-dependent manner.

Induction of NAG-1 and DR4/5 by PTX-2 in p53-deficient
Hep3B cells. Since previous reports have linked the apoptotic
activity of anti-cancer drugs to the induction of both Egr-1
and NAG-1, it was also compared with the effect of PTX-2 on
the protein levels of NAG-1 in HepG2 and Hep3B cells. The

results in Fig. 7 show that PTX-2 time-dependently induced
the expression NAG-1 protein in Hep3B cells, however, the
levels of NAG-1 protein in HepG2 cells remained unchanged.
Then, we attempted to see the involvement of the death
receptors such as DR4 and DR5 in PTX-2-induced apoptosis
in Hep3B cells. As shown in Fig. 7, the immunoblotting data
indicate that the levels of DR4 protein were induced within 2 h
after treatment and continuously expressed within 48 h and
the levels of DR5 were increased after 24 h of treatment with
PTX-2 in p53-deficient Hep3B cells. However, the expression
levels of DR4 and DR5 in the PTX-2-treated HepG2 cells
were relatively unaffected.

Discussion

Generally, wild-type-p53-containing cells, such as HepG2, are
more susceptible to cytotoxic chemical agents and radiation,
closely resembling what is observed in non-tumorigenic

ONCOLOGY REPORTS 19: 517-526, 2008 523

Figure 6. Activation of Egr-1 by PTX-2 in p53-deficient Hep3B cells. (A) HepG2 and Hep3B cells were treated with 10 ng/ml PTX-2 for the indicated times
and the total RNA was isolated and reverse-transcribed. The resulting cDNAs were subjected to PCR with the Egr-1 and GAPDH primers and the reaction
products were subjected to electrophoresis in a 1% agarose gel and visualized by EtBr staining. GAPDH was used as the internal control. (B) The cells under
the same conditions as (A) were lysed and equal amounts of proteins were then separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gels and transferred to nitrocellulose
membranes. The membranes were probed with the Egr-1 antibody and detected by ECL. To confirm equal loading, the blot was stripped of the bound
antibody and reprobed with the anti-actin antibody. (C) Cells were transfected with Egr-1-luc and then treated with 10 ng/ml PTX-2. The cells were collected
and luciferase activity was determined as described under Materials and methods. Results are expressed as a mean ± SD for three determinations for each
treatment group.

517-526 9/1/08 14:36 Page 523
cells. On the other hand, cells containing deletions or
mutations in p53, such as Hep3B, are normally more resistant
to drugs (13,14). However, in the present study, PTX-2 was
markedly toxic to p53-deficient Hep3B cells whereas HepG2
cells were much more resistant to PTX-2, which suggests
that PTX-2 acts by a cytotoxic mechanism that seems to be
p53-independent. The cytotoxic effects of PTX-2 in Hep3B
cells were associated with the induction of apoptotic cell
death confirmed by the characteristic morphological changes
i.e. chromatin condensation and annexin-V-based assay
(Fig. 1). Our previous report also showed that PTX-2 induced
a more toxic effect on p53-deficient cancer cells both in vitro
and in vivo than wild-type-p53-containing cancer cells,
strengthening the idea that p53 was not necessary for the
toxicity mediated by this compound (21), although the
mechanisms that could explain these observations remain to
be clarified. Therefore, to test why p53-deficient cancer cells
are more chemosensitive to PTX-2, we compared the cellular
responses of Hep3B and HepG2 after treatment with PTX-2.
In general, there are two main apoptosis pathways
mediated according to their initiator caspase: the death
receptor (extrinsic) pathway/caspase-8 and the mitochondrial
(intrinsic) pathway, in which various signals can trigger the
release of harmful proteins by mitochondria into the
cytoplasm, leading to the activation of caspase-9 and the
downstream cleavage of caspases such as caspase-3, -7 or -6
(3-6). The death receptor (extrinsic) pathway is triggered by
ligand-induced aggregation of death receptors, such as Fas
and DR4/5, whereas the mitochondrial (intrinsic) pathway is
activated in response to cytotoxic drug-induced cellular stress.
Mitochondria are involved in a variety of key events leading to
apoptosis, such as the release of caspase activators, changes in
electron transport, loss of MMP, the production of reactive
oxygen species and participation in the regulation of Bcl-2
family proteins (3,6,23). In the present study, we characterized

the apoptotic pathway induced by PTX-2 and observed that the
levels of anti-apoptotic Bcl-2 and Bcl-xL protein expression
were down-regulated in Hep3B but not in HepG2 cells. The
pro-apoptotic Bax expression, on the other hand, was
markedly up-regulated in Hep3B in a time-dependent manner,
thus shifting the Bax/Bcl-2 and Bax/Bcl-xL ratio in favor of
apoptosis (Fig. 2). The PTX-2 treatment was able to downregulate
the expression of IAP family proteins, inhibitors of
caspases, such as XIAP, cIAP-1 and cIAP-2 (Fig. 2). This
compound also caused the proteolytic activation of caspases
such as caspases-3, -8 and -9 in Hep3B cells, though not in
HepG2 cells in a time-dependent manner (Fig. 3). However,
under the same conditions, z-DEVD-fmk, a specific caspase-3
inhibitor, prevented the PTX-2-induced apoptosis by blocking
not only the morphological changes, but also the inhibition of
cell viability (Fig. 6). This indicates that caspase-3 plays an
important role in PTX-2-induced apoptosis in p53-deficient
Hep3B cells and PTX-2 induces apoptosis of Hep3B cells in
caspase-dependent pathways. In the intrinsic pathway, MMP
can be regulated by Bcl-2 family proteins (6,23). These
proteins are capable of forming either homo-oligomers or
heterodimers with one another and appear to play distinct
roles in governing MMP. Pro-apoptotic Bax, which can form
homo-oligomers in the outer mitochondrial membrane in
response to apoptotic stimuli, constitutes a gateway for outer
mitochondrial membrane permeabilization. By contrast, antiapoptotic
Bcl-2 can block MMP induced by Bax (23). As
shown in Fig. 5, we observed that PTX-2 increased the loss
of MMP in p53-deficient Hep3B cells without changing in
HepG2 cells. These results indicate that PTX-2 activates
caspase-3 by increasing permeability of mitochondria
membrane and thereby activating capase-9. We also found
that PTX-2 induced the levels of DR4 and DR5 (Fig. 7),
suggesting that the increase in DR4/5 and Bax levels probably
contributed to the activation of caspase-8 in Hep3B cells.

SHIN et al: INDUCTION OF APOPTOSIS BY PECTENOTOXIN-2 524

Figure 7. Effects of PTX-2 on the levels of DR4, DR5 and NAG-1 expression in HepG2 and Hep2B cells. The cells were incubated with 10 ng/ml PTX-2 for
the indicated times, lysed and equal amounts of proteins were then separated by SDS-polyacrylamide gels and transferred to nitrocellulose membranes. The
membranes were probed with the indicated antibodies and detected by ECL. Actin was used as the internal control.

517-526 9/1/08 14:36 Page 524
NAG-1, as a novel molecular target of anti-carcinogenic
agents, has recently been actively investigated. NAG-1 is a
distant member of the transforming growth factor-ß (TGF-ß)
superfamily that has shown vital anti-tumorigenic activity and
was identified from the cyclooxygenase-2 (COX-2) inhibitor
indomethacin-treated HCT-116 colon cancer cells (24).
However, NAG-1 induction in colon cancer cells by NSAID
treatment would induce apoptosis and lead to a cyclooxygenase
(COX)-independent anti-tumorigenic effect (25). Jang et al
(26) suggested that overexpression of the death receptor would
couple with NAG-1 induction to cause apoptosis. Moreover,
ectopic expression of NAG-1 induced apoptosis through the
induction of DR4 and DR5 expression in gastric cancer cells
(26). Besides NSAID, other novel pro-apoptotic and antitumorigenic
agents that also cause NAG-1 overexpression
suggesting pro-apoptotic activity of NAG-1 may provide a
molecular basis in explaining chemopreventive agentmediated
anti-tumorigenesis (27-29). Nevertheless, the
knowledge that NAG-1 is an important target of NSAID and
other novel chemotherapeutic agents, the mechanism of its
regulation is not clearly understood. Several upstream
transcriptional factors have been suspected of causing the
induction of NAG-1 in response to drug treatments. One of
the candidates involved in the regulation is p53. NAG-1
promoter has two p53 binding sites and Wilson et al (30)
reported that genistein, a naturally occurring isoflavonoid
found in soy products, possesses a p53-dependent induction
of NAG-1 in colorectal cancer cells. However, epicatechin
gallate, one of the catechins in green tea, was reported to
induce NAG-1 expression in the same colorectal cancer cell
lines via a p53-independent activation of the activating
transcription factor ATF-3 (31). On the other hand, Baek et al
(32) reported that troglitazone (a peroxisome proliferatoractivated
receptor-γ ligand)-induced expression of NAG-1 is
essentially regulated by the increased expression of the
transcription factor Egr-1, which is a member of the
immediate-early gene family. They also demonstrated that two
Egr-1 binding sites have been identified in transactivating
NAG-1 expression, of which mutation of these sites could
cause a dramatic reduction of NAG-1 promoter activity (32).
Egr-1 is involved in the regulation of cell growth and
differentiation in response to signals such as mitogens, growth
factors and stress stimuli (33-35). Egr-1 has been proposed as
a tumor suppressor gene and its induction is both p53-
dependent and p53-independent. Recently, Lim et al (36)
reported that quercetin, a flavonoid molecule ubiquitously
present in nature, induced the expression of NAG-1 through
Egr-1 and p53 transactivation, during quercetin-induced
apoptosis of human colon carcinoma cells. Thus, we further
examined whether or not the involvement of Egr-1 and
NAG-1 induction during PTX-2 induced apoptosis in p53-
deficient Hep3B cells. In the present study, PTX-2 markedly
up-regulated the levels of DR4 and DR5 in p53-deficient
Hep3B cells (Fig. 7), which was associated with not only the
transactivation of Egr-1 but also the induction of NAG-1
protein (Fig. 6). Thus, our results in part suggest that the
induction of Egr-1 and NAG-1 seems to be critical for PTX-2-
induced apoptosis in a p53-independent manner.
In summary, we have demonstrated that PTX-2 markedly
inhibits p53-deficient Hep3B hepatocellular carcinoma cell

growth and induces apoptosis whereas p53-wild-type HepG2
cells were much more resistant to PTX-2. These results
suggest that PTX-2 acts via a cytotoxic mechanism that
seems to be p53-independent. Regarding the apoptotic
mechanism of PTX-2, we postulate that in the case of Hep3B
cells, the mechanism probably begins with the activation of
the extrinsic pathway by increasing the expression of death
receptors such as DR4 and DR5 and caspase-8 was probably
the first element recruited by the extrinsic pathway triggered
by the binding of the death ligand to its receptor. Then the
downregulation of another apoptosis inhibitor could trigger
apoptosis through the mitochondria. More notably, the novel
NAG-1 pathway had been proven to be one of the molecular
targets that mediate the cytotoxic actions of PTX-2. Egr-1
may be another transcriptional factor that is responsible for
the PTX-2-induced apoptotic action, although its correlation
with NAG-1 regulation could not be confirmed. The present
study explains in part the molecular basis for using PTX-2 as
a potential anti-tumorigenic agent in p53-deficient tumors.

