DNA Damage Response Pathways in Tumor Suppression
and Cancer Treatment

Yulong Liang Æ Shiaw-Yih Lin Æ F. Charles Brunicardi Æ
John Goss Æ Kaiyi Li

Published online: 26 November 2008
 Socie´te´ Internationale de Chirurgie 2008

Abstract Mammalian cells are frequently at risk of DNA
damage from multiple sources. Accordingly, cells have
evolved the DNA damage response (DDR) pathways to
monitor the integrity of their genome. Conceptually, DDR
pathways contain three major components (some with
overlapping functions): sensors, signal transducers, and
effectors. At the level of sensors, ATM (ataxia telangiectasia
mutated) and ATR (ATM-Rad3-related) are proximal
kinases that act as the core sensors of and are central to the
entire DDR. These two kinases function to detect various
forms of damaged DNA and trigger DNA damage response
cascades. If cells harbor DDR defects and fail to repair the
damaged DNA, it would cause genomic instability and, as
a result, lead to cellular transformation. Indeed, deficiencies
of DDR frequently occur in human cancers.
Interestingly, this property of cancer also provides a great
opportunity for cancer therapy. For example, by using a
synthetic lethality model to search for the effective drugs,
ChK1 inhibitors have been shown to selectively target the
tumor cells with p53 mutations. In addition, the inhibitors
of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP-1) showed

selectively killing effects on the cells with defects of
homologous recombination (HR), particularly in the context
of BRCA1/2 mutations. Since Brit1 is a key regulator
in DDR and HR repair, we believe that we can develop a
similar strategy to target cancers with Brit1 deficiency.
Currently, we are conducting a high-throughput screening
to identify novel compounds that specifically target the
Brit1-deficient cancer which will lead to development of
effective personalized drugs to cure cancer in clinic.

Introduction

The replication of mammalian cells is a high-fidelity process
that assures an accurate passage of genomic
information to the daughter cells. However, their genome is
constantly challenged by endogenous metabolic byproducts
and environmental factors that can alter its chemical
structure, corrupt its encoded message, and, as a result, lead
to the improper presence of single-strand DNA breaks
(SSBs) and/or double-strand DNA breaks (DSBs). Many
cellular pathways have evolved to respond to these challenges
(DNA damage response, DDR) to maintain genomic
integrity in the host. The DNA damage response involves
the sensing of DNA damage followed by transduction of
the damage signal to a network of cellular pathways,
including cell cycle checkpoints, DNA repair, and the
apoptotic pathway.
Among all the types of damage, DSBs pose the greatest
challenge to cells and are dangerous and potentially lethal
lesions [1]. DNA-damaging agents such as ionizing radiation,
reactive oxygen species, replication fork collapses,
and dysfunctional telomeres can cause DSBs [2]. For a cell
to preserve genome integrity, DSBs need to be repaired

Presented at the Molecular Surgeon Symposium on Personalized
Genomic Medicine and Surgery at the Baylor College of Medicine,
Houston, Texas, USA, April 12, 2008. The symposium was supported
by a grant from the National Institutes of Health (R13 CA132572 to
Changyi Chen).

Y. Liang  F. C. Brunicardi  J. Goss  K. Li (&)
The Michael E. DeBakey Department of Surgery, Baylor
College of Medicine, Feigin Center, FC830.29, MC-FC850,
1102 Bates Avenue, Houston, TX 77030, USA
e-mail: kli@bcm.tmc.edu

S.-Y. Lin
Department of Systems Biology, The University of Texas M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center, Houston, TX, USA

123

World J Surg (2009) 33:661–666
DOI 10.1007/s00268-008-9840-1
promptly, and the repair can be done through two independent
but not mutually exclusive mechanisms initiated
by DDR: error-prone nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ)
or relatively error-free homologous recombination (HR)
[1]. Efficient detection and appropriate repair of the damaged
DNA are particularly important for dividing cells
where replication or segregation of chromosomes bearing
unrepaired lesions could seriously compromise genome
integrity and eventually lead to DDR-related diseases such
as cancer. In this review we introduce the major pathways
of the DDR, describe the relationship of the DDR with
cancer, and also discuss the novel approach of ongoing
research on drug discovery to target cancer using the
concept of synthetic lethality.

The major pathways for DDR

In general, the DDR network consists of two major parallel
pathways that respond to different DNA damage, and each
pathway is arbitrarily composed of sensors, transducers,
and effectors [3–6]. In this network, two phosphatidylinositol-3-related
kinases, ATM (ataxia telangiectasia
mutated) and ATR (ATM-Rad3-related), are located at the
top of checkpoint signal cascades, which phosphorylate
and activate a variety of molecules to execute the DNA
damage response (Fig. 1) [3–6]. ATM is activated primarily
by DSBs induced by ionizing irradiation and acts
during all phases of the cell cycle, whereas the ATR
pathway responds to agents interfering with functions of
DNA replication forks, such as ultraviolet light and
hydroxyurea [3, 7]. ATM can also activate many of the
downstream targets of the ATR pathway. In fact, some
agents have been shown to be able to activate both pathways,
suggesting that the two major pathways of the DDR
are interlaced in a cell.
At the level of sensors, ATM and ATR are proximal
kinases that act as the core sensors of and are central to the
entire DDR. These two kinases, by collaborating with other
sensor molecules, function to detect various forms of
damaged DNA and trigger DNA damage response cascades.
For example, replication protein A (RPA, an
ssDNA-binding protein) is required for recruitment of ATR
and its partner protein ATRIP to the sites of DNA damage
and also for ATR-mediated ChK1 activation [8]. Full
activation of the DDR pathway induced by ATR also
requires the Rad9-Rad1-HUS1 and Rad17-RFC complexes.
It is possible that Rad17-RFC binds to the damage site and
then loads the Rad9-Rad1-HUS1 complex, which could act
as a scaffold so ATR can phosphorylate and activate its
substrates [9]. Regarding the ATM pathway, the MRE11-
Rad50-NBS1 (MRN) complex is a major sensor of broken
DNA that recruits ATM to the break sites [10–12]. In

addition, several other proteins such as 53BP1 [13, 14],
MDC1 [15, 16], and Brit1/MCPH1 (hereafter Brit1) [17]
might participate in this process to locate ATM or facilitate
activation of ATM at the lesion sites of the DNA. Indeed,
our recent studies demonstrated that Brit1 colocalized with
all these sensor molecules and was required for their activation,
suggesting that Brit1 may be positioned on the very
top of ATM/ATR pathway (Fig. 1) [17].
At the level of transducers, ChK1 and ChK2 form the
core module and lie downstream of and are mainly phosphorylated
by ATM and/or ATR. These two kinases
transduce signals from the sensors of the pathway flow to
the effectors [6]. For instance, ChK1 is phosphorylated by
ATM/ATR at Ser345 and Ser317 in response to various
types of DNA damage which can be induced by ionizing
radiation, ultraviolet light, hydoxyurea, and topoisomerase
inhibitors [18–23]. ChK1, in turn, phosphorylates Ser123
and several other serine residues of the phosphatase
CDC25A [21, 24], which target it for ubiquitin-dependent
degradation [25]. As a result, CDC25A can no longer
dephosphorylate and activate CDK2 and CDK1, causing

MRN

53BP1

CHK2 CHK1

CDC25

MDC1

H2AX

E2F1

BRCA1

BRIT1
RPA
Rad9-Rad1-Hus1

Rad17-RFC

ATM

p53

Apoptosis Checkpoint DNA repair

Irradiation UV

DSBs SSBs

ATR

Fig. 1 Brit1 is involved in regulation of ATM/ATR-dependent DNA
damage response pathways. The DDR network consists mainly of two
interconnected pathways, ATM and ATR. Responding to the DNA
damage, these two core kinases ATM and ATR in the DDR are
activated and recruit the sensors (such as the MRN complex, 53BP1,
and MDC1 in the ATM pathway and RPA in the ATR pathway),
transducers, and effectors proteins, and finally regulate the cell cycle
checkpoint, DNA repair, and apoptosis. Brit1 protein participates in
the two pathways and modulates the checkpoint and DNA repair
through BRCA1 and ChK1 (shown as a black bold line)

662 World J Surg (2009) 33:661–666

123

 14322323, 2009, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1007/s00268-008-9840-1 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [02/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
cells to be arrested in late G1, S, and G2 phases [25, 26].
The role of ChK1 in DDR-induced checkpoints also has
been clearly demonstrated using various ChK1 knockdown/knockout
models [6, 19, 21, 22, 24, 27]. Thus, ChK1
is suggested to be one of the most important checkpoint
proteins downstream of ATM/ATR. In parallel, ChK2 is a
key kinase downstream of ATM and is primarily involved
in DDR-induced apoptosis [6].
The effectors of the DDR include proteins that participate
in DNA repair, transcription regulation, replication,
cell-cycle control, and apoptosis; these proteins include
CDC25, p53, and different DNA repair enzymes [4, 8].
Most of these effectors are downstream molecules of either
ATM/ATR and/or ChK1/ChK2. Among them, p53 has a
pivotal role in arresting cells in execution of the DDR [28].
p53 can be phosphorylated and stabilized by ATM/ATR
and by another PIKK family member, DNA-PK. p53 can
also be phosphorylated by ChK2, which itself functions as
a substrate of ATM in response to DNA damage [5, 29].
The phosporylation of p53 by these DDR kinases leads to
reduced binding of p53 to MDM2, which in turn allows
replacement of ubiquitin moieties by acetylation, resulting
in p53 stabilization and full activation [30]. Upon activation,
depending on the severity of the stress signals, the
pattern of post-transcriptional modifications, and the cellular
context, p53, acting as a potent transcriptional
activator and/or repressor, can induce cell-cycle arrest and/
or apoptosis [28, 31–34], and remarkably p53 has also been
shown to localize directly to sites of DNA damage and
promote proper repair [35].

Tumorigenesis and DDR pathways

As described above, mammalian cells are frequently at risk
of DNA damage from multiple sources, including ultraviolet
light, ionizing radiation, and reactive oxygen species,
and accordingly cells evolve the DDR pathways to monitor
the integrity of their genome and repair any damaged DNA
[36]. Indeed, intact DDR pathways are very critical for
preventing the replication of damaged DNA templates and
transmission of mutations to daughter cells. Therefore,
defects in DDR will result in accumulation of genetic
mutations, gene amplification, and chromosomal alterations,
which in turn contribute to malignant transformation
and tumorigenesis.
The key roles of the DDR pathways in tumor suppression
have been well demonstrated by different research
approaches. The first evidence is seen in patients with
genetic instability syndromes. For instance, at the sensory
level, human syndromes such as ataxia telangiectasia (AT)
and Nijmegen breakage syndrome (NBS) results from gene
deletion/mutation of the DDR pathway (herein are the

genes ATM and NBS, respectively), and show defective
responses to DSBs, striking effects in the nervous and
immune systems, and cancer predisposition [37]. At the
effector level of the DDR, cancer predisposition can be
caused in many syndromes, including Bloom syndrome
(defects in DNA helicases), Fanconi anemia (defects in the
repair of DNA crosslinks), xeroderma pigmentosum
(defects in the NER), Cockayne syndrome (defects in the
NER), trichothiodystrophy (defects in the NER), and LiFraumeni
syndrome (p53, tumor protein p53, TP53, LiFraumeni
syndrome 1) [36, 38–41]. Li-Fraumeni syndrome
has been studied for nearly three decades and is one of
most studied syndromes in this category. This syndrome is
due to a mutation in the p53 gene that greatly increases the
susceptibility of patients to cancer [42, 43].
Second, many of the genes/proteins in the DDR are
usually mutated and/or modified in somatic cancer tissues.
For example, initiation of human breast, colon, lung, and
urinary bladder tumors is characterized by phosphorylation
of many proteins in the DDR, including the kinases ATM
and ChK2, the histone H2AX, and one of the master regulators
of cell cycle, p53 [44, 45]. As for genetic
aberrations, it has been well known that patients who have
loss-of-function mutations in BRCA1/2 genes are predisposed
to breast and ovarian cancer [46]. Our studies on
Brit1 also identified aberrations of Brit1 gene in several
cancer lineages that link its deficiency to cancer initiation
and progression [17]. In addition, epigenetic silencing of
DDR genes has also been associated with tumorigenicity.
For example, the promoters of BRCA1, MLH1, MGMT,
and the helicase WRN have all been shown to be aberrantly
methylated in human cancers [47]. In fact, the aberrations
of DDR genes in cancer cells not only facilitate the initiation
and progression of cancer but may also cause the
cells’ resistance to many conventional cancer treatments. It
is believed that cancer cells (and precancerous cells) generally
grow under the condition of an increased level of
endogenous DNA damage than do noncancer cells [44, 48,
49]. To survive in such a hostile environment, cancer cells
must evolve new mechanisms to counteract the severe
endogenous and exogenous genotoxic stress. This adaptation
by cancer cells may indeed be responsible for their
resistance to cancer treatment such as ionizing radiation
and cytotoxic chemotherapy.
Finally, using gene knockout/knockdown technology,
many studies have demonstrated that impairment of individual
molecules in DDR such as p53 [50], 53BP1 [51],
MDC1 [15], ATM [52], H2AX [53], and BRCA1 [54] can
result in or further facilitate tumorigenesis. Taken together,
deficiency of the DDR pathways clearly plays a crucial role
in tumorigenesis and their response to treatment. By
studying the DDR network and understanding how its
deficiency is implicated in cancer, we may be able to

World J Surg (2009) 33:661–666 663

123

 14322323, 2009, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1007/s00268-008-9840-1 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [02/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
develop drugs that can facilitate the DDR in normal cells to
prevent cancer and the therapeutic agents that may specifically
target DDR-deficient cancer for cancer treatment.

Drug development based on the deficiency of DDR:
synthetic lethality model

Although it has been implicated in initiation of most cancers,
DDR deficiency in cancer cells was also exploited
therapeutically, such as radiotherapy and chemotherapeutics
using DDR-targeting drugs. For example, the drugs
that pharmacologically inhibit DNA repair have been
proposed to be used to enhance chemosensitivity and
radiosensitivity [55]. Recently, data indicate that deficiency
in DNA repair actually acts as a therapeutic target in cancer
[56]. Among the components of the DDR, the molecules
with enzymatic activities were usually selected as a specific
target of small molecule inhibitors, some of which are
being evaluated in phase I/II studies [56]. These key
enzymes include the PIKK family kinases (ATM/ATR and
DNA-PK), ChK1/2, and PARP-1. Here we take a close
look at ChK1/2 and PARP-1, both of which are suggestive
of the synthetic lethality model, to search for the targets
from DDR deficiency.
Currently, most therapies target proliferating cells rather
than cancer cells per se. This can result in inefficient killing
of cancer cells that have a low proliferative index. Furthermore,
highly proliferative normal cells, such as cells in
the bone marrow or gut, also are eradicated by the same
therapies, which can reduce the patient’s quality of life and
promote cancer recurrence due to immune suppression.
Recently, however, the concept of synthetic lethality
emerged. This concept was borrowed from classical
genetics by Lee Hartwell and Stephen Friend to describe
situations in which a mutation of gene A and a drug targeting
gene B together cause a cell’s death [57]. This idea of
synthetic lethality indeed has being used to develop novel
drugs in cancer treatment. For example, ChK1, an important
downstream kinase of the PIKKs, has recently been identified
as the target of the staurosporine analog UCN-01,
which causes abrogation of the G2/M checkpoint in
response to ionizing radiation in p53-negative cells [58].
Thus, targeting the ChK1-related S and G2/M checkpoint
activity would possibly lead to preferential sensitization of
p53 mutant cancer cells to genotoxic agents. Based on this
rationale, three agents targeting ChK1 (AZD7762,
PF47736, and XL844) combined with gemcitabine are
being evaluated in phase I studies, and it has also recently
been disclosed that a phase I study of the Lilly/ICOS agent
IC83 in combination with Pemetrexed has begun. Interestingly,
AZD7762, PF47736, and XL844 also show a range of
potencies against ChK2. Because ChK2 activates the G1

checkpoint and apoptotic pathways, it has been hypothesized
that ChK2 inhibition may lead to enhanced effects of
sensitizing p53-null cancer cells while protecting normal
cells [59]. Therefore, ChK1/2 inhibitors (i.e., targeting the
B gene in the above synthetic lethality model) might be
suitable to selectively treat tumors with a p53-mutant
background (i.e., the A gene mutation in the above model),
which occurs in almost half of the malignant tumors.
Another example of synthetic lethality in cancer treatment
are the inhibitors of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP-1). PARP-1 is a key regulator of the base excision
repair (BER) process and detects SSBs that arise from
reactive oxygen species generated through normal and
pathogenic cellular metabolic processes [60]. PARP-1 catalyzes
ADP-ribose generated from nicotinamide adenine
dinucleotide (NAD) to its downstream targets with a
covalently charged branched chain of poly(ADP-ribose),
which is known as poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation. The main target
of this modification is believed to be PARP-1 itself, and the
modified PARP-1 may recruit other components of the BER
pathway to repair SSBs. Other potential targets of poly(-
ADP-ribosyl)ation include histones, transcription factors,
and other signaling molecules such as NF-kB, DNA-PK,
p53, topoisomerase I, and laminin B, which mainly couple
DNA repair with regulation of the cell cycle [61].
Recently, some small molecules based on nicotinamide
analogs are reported to function as inhibitors of PARP-1
[62, 63]. Notably, the emerging evidence indicates that
PARP-1 inhibitors can sensitize tumor cells to cytotoxic
therapies such as temozolomide, topoisomerase I inhibitors,
platinum, and radiation [64–69]. In fact, a number of
these molecules are being developed as clinical candidates
to treat cancer. For example, AG014699 has been evaluated
in the phase II study of human solid tumors
administered temozolomide [70, 71]. Interestingly, inhibition
of PARP-1 was found to selectively kill BRCA1- and
BRCA2-deficient cells with minimal effect on wild-type
cells and cells with heterozygosis of either BRCA1 or
BRCA2 mutations [72, 73]. Further studies indicated that
this selectivity of PARP-1 inhibitors was based on the
defects of HR in cells [69]. Therefore, the inhibitors of
PARP-1 may function as novel drugs to treat tumors with
HR deficiency (Fig. 2). A clinical trial of one of the PARP1
inhibitors (KU0059436) has begun in order to evaluate its
pharmacokinetics and pharmacodynamics for the treatment
of BRCA-associated cancer [74]; the trial may be expanded
to treat all HR-deficient cancers in the future. PARP-1
inhibition is another example of using synthetic lethality in
cancer treatment where HR genes represent gene A, which
are defective in cancer, and PARP-1 inhibitors target the
PARP-1 gene, the B gene (Fig. 2).
In addition to the examples described above, many new
drugs can be developed to target cancer based on the

664 World J Surg (2009) 33:661–666

123

 14322323, 2009, 4, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1007/s00268-008-9840-1 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [02/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
concept of synthetic lethality, particularly in the context of
DDR deficiency. Since virtually all cancers suffer from
deficiency of certain DDR gene(s) or pathway(s) (i.e., A),
we should be able to screen for drugs that target the
complementary B pathway to achieve the specific killing.
These drugs should have low toxicity to the normal cells
because of the intactness of the A gene or pathway in the
normal cells [75]. Because Brit1 deficiency has been shown
in tumor-prone mice (K. Li, unpublished) and its aberrations
have been significantly implicated in human cancer
development [17], we currently are conducting a highthroughput
screen to identify new compounds that can
specifically target cancer with Brit1 deficiency. Our drugscreening
program will certainly be expanded in the future
to target the cancer with other DDR deficiencies with the
ultimate goal of developing the most effective personalized
drugs to cure cancer in clinic.

