Free Radical Biology and Medicine
Volume 47, Issue 1, 1July 2009, Pages 13-26

Review Article
PARP inhibitors: New partners in the therapy of
cancer and inflammatory diseases

Andreína Peralta-Leal , José Manuel Rodríguez-Vargas , Rocío Aguilar-Quesada , María Isabel Rodríguez ,

José Luis Linares , Mariano Ruiz de Almodóvar , F. Javier Oliver

Show more

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.freeradbiomed.2009.04.008

Get rights and content

Abstract

Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerases (PARPs) are defined as cell signaling enzymes that catalyze the

transfer of ADP-ribose units from NAD to a number of acceptor proteins. PARP-1, the best

characterized member of the PARP family, which currently comprises 18 members, is an abundant

nuclear enzyme implicated in cellular responses to DNA injury provoked by genotoxic stress. PARP is

involved in DNA repair and transcriptional regulation and is now recognized as a key regulator of cell

survival and cell death as well as a master component of a number of transcription factors involved in

tumor development and inflammation. PARP-1 is essential to the repair of DNA single-strand breaks

via the base excision repair pathway. Inhibitors of PARP-1 have been shown to enhance the cytotoxic

effects of ionizing radiation and DNA-damaging chemotherapy agents, such as the methylating

agents and topoisomerase I inhibitors. There are currently at least five PARP inhibitors in clinical trial

development. Recent in vitro and in vivo evidence suggests that PARP inhibitors could be used not

only as chemo/radiotherapy sensitizers, but also as single agents to selectively kill cancers defective

in DNA repair, specifically cancers with mutations in the breast cancer-associated genes (BRCA1 and

BRCA2). PARP becomes activated in response to oxidative DNA damage and depletes cellular energy

pools, thus leading to cellular dysfunction in various tissues. The activation of PARP may also induce

various cell death processes and promotes an inflammatory response associated with multiple organ

failure. Inhibition of PARP activity is protective in a wide range of inflammatory and ischemia–

reperfusion-associated diseases, including cardiovascular diseases, diabetes, rheumatoid arthritis,

endotoxic shock, and stroke. The aim of this review is to overview the emerging data in the literature

showing the role of PARP in the pathogenesis of cancer and inflammatory diseases and unravel the

a a a a

b b a

Share Cite

+
solid body of literature that supports the view that PARP is an important target for therapeutic

intervention in critical illness.

Introduction

The enzymatic activity responsible for the synthesis of poly(ADP-ribose) (PAR) polymers was

originally described in the early 1960s in Paul Mandel’s laboratory in Strasbourg [1]. This initial

observation generated significant biological interest and started a rather competitive field of research

in which laboratories from various disciplines involved in studies on genomic stability,

posttranslational modification of proteins, transcription, cell cycle, cell survival, and cell death are

still heavily involved.

In the course of the years the enzymes responsible for PAR synthesis have been given different

acronyms but currently are called PAR polymerases (PARPs), a rather generally accepted term. In the

past decade, genomic approaches have allowed the identification of 18 putative PARP sequences in

the human genome, and a significant amount of information is available for at least 5 enzymes [2]:

PARP-1 (113kDa), PARP-2 (62kDa), PARP-3 (60kDa), PARP-4 (193kDa), and PARP-5 (142kDa) or

Tankyrase 1 (TRF1-interacting, ankyrin-related ADP-ribose polymerase).

PARP-1 is the founding member and the most commonly studied of these enzymes. It is an abundant

nuclear protein in which it is possible to distinguish three domains: first, a DNA-binding region able

to recognize DNA strand breaks; second, a central automodification region rich in glutamic acid and

containing a breast cancer-associated protein C-terminal motif; and third, a NAD-binding region with

all the catalytic activities of the full-length enzyme. DNA strand breaks remarkably increase PARP-1

basal activity (up to 500 times) [3]. Compelling evidence suggests that PARP-1, through its physical

association with or by the poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation of partner proteins, regulates chromatin structure,

DNA metabolism, and gene expression [4]. PARP-1 accounts for at least 85% of maximally activated

cellular PARP activity.

Section snippets

The development of PARP inhibitors

Most of the PARP inhibitors in development mimic the nicotinamide moiety of NAD . PARP catalyzes

the cleavage of NAD into ADP and ADP-ribose and attaches several molecules of the latter to the

target protein in a process called poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation. Therefore, molecules that mimic NAD block

the binding of the NAD to the enzyme, inhibiting PARP activity. The discovery of inhibitors of PARP

was initially based on empirical, high-throughput screening, followed by optimization by chemical…

PARP and DNA repair

The genome is under constant mutational stress through exposure to exogenous and endogenous

agents that damage DNA. In mammalian cells, more than 150 proteins have been described that are

involved in the response to DNA damage [13]. These proteins coordinate the repair of DNA lesions by

+

+

+

+
different repair pathways [14], although there are also considerable overlap and interactions between

mechanisms. In the absence of adequate detection and repair of DNA damage, these alterations can

result in…

PARP inhibitors in the treatment of DNA repair deficiency-related cancers

Inhibition of PARP induces accumulation of large numbers of unrepaired SSBs, leading to the collapse

of replication forks during S phase and the consequent generation of DSBs. Single-strand breaks are

usually repaired by the base excision repair pathway; therefore, inhibition of this pathway greatly

increases the number of unrepaired single-strand breaks, which subsequently leads to DSBs at

replication forks. Therefore, cells deficient in DNA DSB repair are highly sensitive to chemical…

Other pathways involved in HR

Loss of PARP-1 has been shown to cause an increase in Rad51 foci and sister chromatid exchanges

[54] as a result of an increase in the number of lesions normally repaired by HR. The sensitivity of

cells deficient in proteins involved in HR to PARP inhibition suggests that treatment with PARP

inhibitors maybe a useful therapeutic strategy for tumors displaying defects in the HR pathway other

than BRCA defects. The observation that ATM and CHK2 depletion resulted in sensitivity to PARP

inhibitors …

Mismatch-repair (MMR)-deficient cells

Mutations in genes involved in MMR or in their expression result in increased risk of tumor

development and in increased resistance to many anticancer therapies [51], [57]. PARP inhibitors

have been shown to sensitize resistant cells to alkylating agents [52], [58]; moreover, a PARP inhibitor

(AG1461) enhanced temozolomide activity in MMR-proficient cells, but intriguingly, it was more

effective in MMR-deficient cells [57]. It is likely that in MMR-deficient cells there is a switch in

toxic…

PARP inhibitors as antiangiogenic agents

As has been described in the previous section, PARP inhibitors are being developed for the treatment

of cancer, both in monotherapy and in combination with radiation and chemotherapeutic agents in

humans. Recently, a number of reports from various laboratories, including ours, have led to a novel

and unexpected effect of PARP inhibitors, showing a relationship between PARP and angiogenesis,

and to the proposition of PARP inhibitors as antiangiogenic agents.

So far at least five PARP inhibitors…

Role of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase in oxidative/nitrosative stress-related
pathologies

It must be stressed that PARP-1 functions as a double-edged sword: on one hand, moderate

activation of PARP can be of physiological importance via enhancement of DNA repair. On the other
hand, overactivation of PARP represents an important mechanism of tissue damage in various

pathological conditions associated with oxidative and nitrosative stress, including myocardial

reperfusion injury [68], [69], heart transplantation [70], and autoimmune β-cell destruction

associated with diabetes mellitus …

Poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation inhibitors: promising drug candidates for a wide variety
of pathophysiologic conditions

The “suicide hypothesis” is considered a key mechanism explaining the protective effects of PARP

inhibition in various oxidative stress-induced diseases, involving overwhelming DNA damage (as

result of ROS and RNS release during inflammation) and excessive activation of PARP leading to NAD

and ATP depletion and necrotic cell death. The production of both NO (via the route of formation of

peroxynitrite) and ROS induces damage in DNA and consequently leads to the activation of PARP-1

and PARP-2…

Perspectives

Pharmacological inhibition of key proteins involved in the response to DNA damage has emerged as

an effective tool for cancer treatment, as the resistance of cancer cells to DNA-damaging agents

originates from the modulation of DNA repair pathways. PARP has important prosurvival and

protective functions in terms of DNA repair. A multitude of novel pharmacological inhibitors of PARP

has entered clinical testing either as adjunct antitumor therapeutics or as monotherapy in familiar

breast and…

