CUX1: target of Akt signalling and mediator of
resistance to apoptosis in pancreatic cancer

S Ripka,1 A Neesse,1 J Riedel,1 E Bug,1 A Aigner,2 R Poulsom,3 S Fulda,4
J Neoptolemos,5 W Greenhalf,5 P Barth,6 T M Gress,1 P Michl1

ABSTRACT
Background and aims The transcription factor CUX1 is
known as a regulator of cell differentiation and cell cycle
progression. Previously, CUX1 was identified as
a modulator of invasiveness in various cancers. Based on
expression profiles suggesting a role for CUX1 in
mediating chemoresistance, the aim of this study was to
characterise the effect of CUX1 on apoptosis as well as
its regulation by signalling pathways modulating drug
resistance in pancreatic cancer.
Methods The effect of CUX1 on TRAIL- (tumour necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand) and druginduced
apoptosis was analysed using overexpression
and knock-down strategies. Regulation of CUX1 by
phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt signalling was
examined at the mRNA and protein level. The effect of
CUX1 knock-down by nanoparticle-complexed small
interfering RNA (siRNA) in vivo was analysed in a murine
xenograft model. Furthermore, CUX1 RNA and protein
expression was evaluated in human pancreatic cancer
and adjacent normal tissues.
Results Knock-down of CUX1 resulted in significantly
enhanced TRAIL- and drug-induced apoptosis, associated
with increased PARP (poly ADP-ribose polymerase)
cleavage and caspase activity. Vice versa,
overexpression of CUX1 inhibited apoptosis. CUX1
expression was induced by activation of Akt/protein
kinase B signalling, and decreased by PI3K inhibitors. The
antiapoptotic effect of CUX1 was associated with
upregulation of BCL2 and downregulation of tumour
necrosis factor a. CUX1 was significantly overexpressed
in pancreatic cancers, as analysed by in situ hybridisation
and immunohistochemistry. In vivo, silencing of CUX1 by
intratumourally administered polyethyleniminecomplexed
siRNA led to reduced tumour growth and
increased apoptosis in pancreatic cancer xenografts.
Conclusion CUX1 was identified as an important
mediator of tumour cell survival in pancreatic cancer
in vitro and in vivo.

INTRODUCTION
Pancreatic cancer is a devastating disease with
a dismal prognosis, representing the fifth leading
cause of cancer-related deaths in the Western world.
Histologically, ductal adenocarcinomas of the
pancreas (PDAC) account for >95% of all exocrine
pancreatic cancers. PDAC is almost uniformly fatal,
with a 5-year survival rate of <5%.1 For advanced
stages of the disease, a large number of single and
combined radiotherapeutic or chemotherapeutic
regimens have been tested during the past decades,
and at most achieve palliation and/or modest, if
any, prolongation of survival.2 This is largely due to

the high level of chemoresistance of this tumour
entity. In this appalling situation new therapeutic
targets to overcome chemoresistance are urgently
needed.2
The transcription factor CUX1, also known as
CUTL1 or CDP (CCAAT displacement protein),
belongs to a family of homoeobox transcription
factors involved in the regulation of cell proliferation,
embryonic development and cell differentiation.3
4 CUX1 is present in all metazoans and
is expressed as multiple isoforms. It contains up
to four evolutionarily conserved DNA-binding
domains, three of which are known as Cut repeats
and one as a Cut homeodomain (HD).5
Transcriptional activation of CUX1 leads to
increased cellular proliferation and cell cycle
progression in various cell systems.6e8 In vivo,
knockout studies revealed a phenotype characterised
by reduced growth, retarded differentiation
of the lung epithelia, hair follicle defects, reduced
male fertility and deficient Tand B cell function.9e11
In contrast, mice transgenic for Cux1 showed
organomegaly and multiorgan hyperplasia.12
Recent reports suggest an important role for
CUX1 in tumourigenesis and tumour progression.4
Goulet et al described a tissue-specific CUX1
isoform that appears to be strongly expressed in
some breast tumours and, when overexpressed,
inhibited tubule formation of breast cancer cells in
vitro, indicating that CUX1 might enhance dedifferentiation
of tumours.13 We could show that
CUX1 stimulates tumour cell migration and invasiveness
in vitro and in vivo, and acts as an
important effector of transforming growth factor
b signalling.14 15 The important role of CUX1 in
promoting cell motility and invasiveness is underlined
by the fact that CUX1 expression is strongly
associated with a less differentiated phenotype and
decreased survival in invasive breast cancer.14 Given
the role of CUX1 as a transcriptional regulator, we
could identify several downstream targets of
CUX1, such as the Wnt family member WNT5A,
which mediate the proinvasive effects of CUX1 in
various tumour cells.16 17
Interestingly, analysis of gene expression profiles
available in the literature revealed the CUX1 is
increased in carcinomas resistant to chemotherapeutic
drugs such as oxaliplatin-resistant ovarian
cancers as compared with drug-sensitive tumours.18
Furthermore, CUX1 was found to be decreased
after chemotherapy-induced apoptosis.19 Based on
these data, we were interested to discover whether
CUX1 interferes with tumour cell survival and
resistance to apoptosis, which could help to explain
the striking association of CUX1 expression with

See Commentary, p 1014

< Additional figures and a table
are published online only. To
view these files please visit the
journal online (http://gut.bmj.
com).
1
Department of
Gastroenterology and
Endocrinology, University
Hospital, Philipps-University,
Marburg, Germany
2
Department of Pharmacology
and Toxicology,
Philipps-University, School of
Medicine, Marburg, Germany
3
Cancer Research UK, London
Research Institute, London, UK
4
University Childrens Hospital,
Ulm University, Germany
5
Department of Surgery,
University of Liverpool,
Liverpool, UK
6
Institute of Pathology,
Philipps-University, School of
Medicine, Marburg, Germany

Correspondence to
Dr Patrick Michl, Department of
Gastroenterology, University of
Marburg, Baldinger Strasse,
D-35043 Marburg, Germany;
michlp@med.uni-marburg.de

Revised 10 November 2009
Accepted 23 December 2009
Published Online First
4 May 2010

Gut 2010;59:1101e1110. doi:10.1136/gut.2009.189720 1101

Pancreas

 on September 2, 2024 at ShanghaiTech University. Protected by copyright. http://gut.bmj.com/ Gut: first published as 10.1136/gut.2009.189720 on 4 May 2010. Downloaded from
enhanced tumour progression and poor prognosis we had
observed before in breast cancer.14 In this study, we could show
a significant impact of CUX1 on tumour cell survival in pancreatic
cancer cells in vitro and in vivo, and identified CUX1 as a transcriptional
target of phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase (PI3K)/Akt
signalling.

MATERIALS AND METHODS
Materials and cell lines
Recombinant human TRAIL (tumour necrosis factor-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand) and insulin-like growth facor 1 (IGF1)
were obtained from R&D Systems (Minneapolis, Minnesota,
USA). The PI3K inhibitor LY294002 was purchased from Cell
Signalling Technology (Beverly, Massachusetts, USA). PANC1
and HEK293 cell lines were obtained from the ATCC (Rockville,
Maryland, USA). ImimPC1 cells were kindly provided by FX Real
(Centro Nacional de Investigaciones Oncológicas, Madrid,
Spain). Cells were maintained in Dulbecco`s modified minimal
essential medium (Gibco, Invitrogen, Carlsbad, California, USA)
supplemented with 10% fetal calf serum (Gibco), 100 mg/ml
streptomycin (Sigma-Aldrich, St Louis, Missouri, USA) and
100 U/ml penicillin (Sigma). All cell lines were grown at 378C in
5% CO2. 5-Fluorouracil (5-FU) was purchased from Sigma and
gemcitabine was obtained from Lilly (Bad Homburg, Germany).

Plasmids and small interfering RNA (siRNA) oligonucleotides
Myc-tagged full-length human CUX1 in pMX vectors and
C-terminal CUX1 in pXJ vectors were a kind gift of A Nepveu
(McGill University, Canada). The AKT2/pcDNA4 expression
plasmid was a kind gift of A Schulze (Cancer Research UK,
London Research Institute, UK). Plasmids were transfected into
PANC1 and HEK293 cells using Transfast transfection reagent
(Promega, Madison, Wisconsin, USA).
CUX1 was transiently suppressed by using two different
oligonucleotides (hCUX1_1 and hCUX1_2) as described previously.14
All assays were confirmed using two different siRNA
sequences to minimise the risk of possible off-target effects.
siRNA oligonucleotides were purchased from Ambion (Austin,
Texas, USA). Both silencing sequences resulted in a knock-down
efficiency >70% (supplementary figure 1). PANC1 cells were
transfected using Transmessenger transfection reagent (Qiagen,
Hilden, Germany) according to the manufacturers instructions.
To optimise transfection efficacy, cells were transfected with
siRNA twice, with an interval of 24 h. ImimPC1 cells were
transfected using XtremeGene (Roche Applied Science,
Mannheim, Germany) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. As non-silencing controls, silencer-negative control
siRNAs from Ambion were used.

Quantitative real-time PCR (RT-PCR)
RNA was extracted using the RNeasy Mini Kit (Qiagen), and
first-strand cDNA was synthesised using random hexamer
primers and Superscript II reverse transcriptase (Invitrogen).
Quantitative RT-PCR analysis was performed with an Applied
Biosystems 7500 Fast Real time PCR using the SYBR Green PCR
Master Mix kit (Applied Biosystems, Wellesley, Massachusetts,
USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. Sequencespecific
primer pairs were designed using the PrimerExpress
software (Applied Biosystems). The ribosomal protein RPLP0
(NM_001002) was used as internal standard. Primer sequences
for CUX1 and RPLP0 are shown in supplementary table 1.
Apoptosis pathway-focused gene expression profiling
comprising 84 genes was performed using the RT2 Profiler PCR

Array System (SuperArray Bioscience, Frederick, Maryland,
USA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. A list of the
genes analysed in this profiler is available online (<http://www.
sabiosciences.com/rt_pcr_product/HTML/PAHS-012A.html>).

Immunoblotting
Cells were incubated in lysis buffer (50 mM HEPES (pH 7.5),
150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EGTA, 100 mM NaF, 10 mM Na4P2O7,
10% glycerol, 1% Triton X-100) supplemented with a cocktail of
protease inhibitors (Complete, Roche Applied Science). Proteins
were separated by 10% sodium dodecylsulfateepolyacrylamide
gel electrophoresis (SDSePAGE) and transferred onto polyvinylidene
difluoride (PVDF) membranes (Millipore, Billerica,
Massachusetts, USA). Immunoblots were probed with primary
antibodies against CUX1 (custom-made rabbit polyclonal antibody
as previously described14) caspase-3, cleaved caspase-3,
poly ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP), bcl-2 (Cell Signalling
Technology), pAKT (Cell Signalling Technology) and b-actin
(Sigma-Aldrich) and subsequently incubated with peroxidaseconjugated
secondary antibodies (Amersham Biosciences, Freiburg,
Germany). Blots were detected by ECL chemiluminescence
(Amersham).

Apoptosis assays
Apoptosis was assessed in three ways: (1) by fluorescenceactivated
cell sorting (FACS) analysis to determine DNA fragmentation
of propidium iodide-stained nuclei20; (2) using the
Cell Death Detection ElisaPLUS for quantification of histoneassociated
DNA fragments (Roche Diagnostics); and (3) by the
DeadEnd Fluorometric TUNEL System (Promega) according to
the manufacturer’s instructions. Using the DeadEnd TUNEL
(terminal deoxynucleotide transferase-mediated dUTP nick end
labelling) assay, the labelled DNA was visualised directly by
fluorescence microscopy.

Caspase activity
Caspase-3 and caspase-7 activities were measured using the
luminescent assay Caspase-Glo3/7 (Promega), according to the
manufacturer’s instructions. The assay provides a luminogenic
caspase-3/7 substrate, which contains the tetrapeptide sequence
DEVD. Luminescence is proportional to the amount of caspase
activity present.

Tumour necrosis factor a (TNFa) ELISA
TNFa secretion by PANC1 cells over 24 h with or without
knock-down of CUX1 was measured in the cell culture supernatant
using a TNFa ELISA (BioSource Europe, Nivelles,
Belgium) according to the manufacturer’s instructions.

In vivo experiments
All animal experiments were approved by the local government
authorities and were performed according to the guidelines
of the animal welfare committee. Twenty tumours were induced
in 10 female NMRI nu/nu mice (left and right flank each)
by subcutaneous injection of 106 CAPAN1 cells/0.1 ml of
phosphate-buffered saline (PBS) each. After the tumours had
reached a volume of w60 mm3
, mice were randomised into two
groups and 10 mg polyethylenimine (PEI)-complexed siRNA
against CUX1 or PEI-complexed non-silencing control siRNA,
dissolved in 50 ml of PBS, were injected intratumourally (three
times a week over 3 weeks, 10 tumours per group). PEIesiRNA
complexes were based on PEI F25-LMW21 and were generated as
described previously.22 Tumours were measured during the
course of treatment, and, after the animals had been sacrificed,

1102 Gut 2010;59:1101e1110. doi:10.1136/gut.2009.189720

Pancreas

 on September 2, 2024 at ShanghaiTech University. Protected by copyright. http://gut.bmj.com/ Gut: first published as 10.1136/gut.2009.189720 on 4 May 2010. Downloaded from
tumours were paraffin embedded and immunohistologically
evaluated for necrotic areas (H&E staining), apoptosis (M30
CytoDEATH antibody, Roche) and CUX1 expression (mouse
monoclonal anti-CUX1, Abcam, Cambridge, UK).

In situ hybridisation (ISH)
ISH for hCUX1 mRNA was performed as described previously.14 23
The human CUX1 probe (nucleotides 330e1040) was PCR
amplified and cloned into the KpnI and SphI sites of the
pGEM3Z vector (Promega). Multiple tissue arrays (MTAs)
comprising 49 tumour samples and paired normal control tissues
were prepared at the Department of Surgery, University of
Liverpool, UK, according to the guidelines of the local ethics
committee. Expression within the tumour epithelium was
scored by two investigators blinded to the H&E sections as
negative or positive, as described previously.14 As a positive
control, ACTB (b-actin) mRNA was detected on a near serial
section for each tissue.

Immunohistochemistry
For immunohistochemical analysis, an independent set of eight
human pancreatic adenocarcinoma tissues and normal pancreatic
tissues were provided by the Institute of Pathology of the
University of Marburg according to the guidelines of the local
ethics committee. Immunohistochemical analysis was performed
as previously described.24 In brief, paraffin sections were stained
after antigen retrieval (microwave in antigen-unmasking solution,
Vector Laboratories, Burlingame, California, USA) with rabbit
polyclonal anti-CUX1 (1:200), as described previously.14Antibody
binding was visualised using a biotinylated secondary antibody,
avidin-conjugated peroxidase (ABC method; Vector Laboratories),
3,39
-diaminobenzidine tetrachloride (DAB) as a substrate, and
H&E as counterstain.

Statistical analysis
For the in vitro experiments, statistical analyses were performed
using the double-sided unpaired Student t test after Bonferroni
correction for multiple testing, where appropriate. Differences in
tumour growth in the mouse xenografts were analysed using
paired t test/Wilcoxon matched pairs test.

RESULTS
Knock-down of CUX1 enhances TRAIL- and drug-induced
apoptosis in pancreatic cancer cell lines
We first evaluated the effect of CUX1 on basal and TRAILinduced
apoptosis in two different pancreatic cancer cell lines,
PANC1 and ImimPC1. Knock-down of CUX1 by specific siRNAs
significantly induced basal apoptosis rates in both cell lines, as
determined by FACS analysis of the sub-G1 population (figure 1A,
B). ImimPC1 cells were more sensitive than PANC1 cells to
knock-down of CUX1, resulting in a significant increase in
apoptosis without any apoptotic stimulus. Further, knock-down
of CUX1 significantly enhanced TRAIL-induced apoptosis,
whereas treatment with TRAIL alone had only a minor effect on
apoptosis induction (figure 1A,B). The use of two independent
CUX1-specific siRNA oligonucleotides, which had been validated
previously,14 revealed comparable results (data not
shown). The effects of CUX1 siRNA on apoptosis were
confirmed by quantification of histone-associated DNA fragments
using a specific ELISA (supplementary figure 2) and by
TUNEL staining, which both revealed very similar results
(supplementary figure 3). All assays verified that knock-down of
CUX1 by specific siRNAs significantly enhanced basal and
TRAIL-induced apoptosis.
TRAIL is known to induce the death receptor pathway of
apoptosis via binding to its cognate surface receptors (extrinsic

Figure 1 (A and B) Knock-down of
CUX1 increases TRAIL (tumour necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing ligand)-
induced apoptosis. Fluorescenceactivated
cell sorting (FACS) analysis of
PANC1 (A) and ImimPC1 (B) cells,
transiently transfected with CUX1 small
interfering RNA (siRNA) (siCUX1) or nonsilencing
control siRNA (siC), and
subsequently treated with 100 ng/ml
(PANC1) or 75 ng/ml (ImimPC1) TRAIL
for 20 h. DNA fragmentation was
quantified by FACS analysis of propidium
iodide-stained DNA in sub-G1 phase
(M1). Results are representative for four
independent experiments and are shown
as the mean6SD. *p<0.05 compared
with siC cells; **p<0.05 compared with
siC+TRAIL cells. (C) Knock-down of
CUX1 enhances drug-induced apoptosis,
as detected by ELISA for histoneassociated
DNA fragments. PANC1 cells
transiently transfected with siCUX1 or
siC were treated with gemcitabine
(80 mg/ml) or 5-fluorouracil (5-FU; 50 mg/
ml) for 20 h. Quantification of histoneassociated
DNA fragmentation using
a specific ELISA was measured at OD 405 nmeOD 492 nm. Results are representative for three independent experiments and are shown as the mean6SD.
*p<0.05 compared with siC control cells, **p<0.05 compared with siC+gemcitabine; ***p<0.05 compared with siC+5-FU cells. (D) Knock-down of
CUX1 leads to increased poly ADP-ribose polymerase (PARP) cleavage. After transfection of CUX1 (siCUX) or control (siC) siRNA, PANC1 and ImimPC1
cells were treated with TRAIL or gemcitabine for 20 h. PARP protein was analysed by immunoblotting with anti-PARP, with cleaved PARP detected as
smaller band below the uncleaved form. CUX1 levels were assessed by immunoblotting to confirm the knock-down (similar results in ImimPC1 cells are not
shown). The blot was reprobed with the b-actin antibody to assess equality of loading.

Gut 2010;59:1101e1110. doi:10.1136/gut.2009.189720 1103

Pancreas

 on September 2, 2024 at ShanghaiTech University. Protected by copyright. http://gut.bmj.com/ Gut: first published as 10.1136/gut.2009.189720 on 4 May 2010. Downloaded from
pathway). By comparison, chemotherapeutic drugs characteristically
trigger apoptosis via induction of DNA damage and
activation of the intrinsic apoptosis pathway. To test the effect
of CUX1 in drug-induced apoptosis, we treated PANC1
cells6CUX1 siRNA with gemcitabine or 5-FU, two drugs
commonly used in pancreatic cancer patients. Similar to TRAILinduced
apoptosis, knock-down of CUX1 sensitised both cell
lines to apoptosis induced by gemcitabine or 5-FU (figure 1C).

CUX1 siRNA-induced apoptosis is associated with enhanced
PARP cleavage and activation of effector caspases
To delineate further the downstream events in CUX1-modulated
apoptosis, we analysed characteristic features of apoptosis such
as cleavage of PARP and activation of caspases.
Downregulation of CUX1 led to enhanced PARP cleavage,
after treatment with both TRAIL and various drugs including
gemcitabine (figure 1D). Similar effects of CUX1 could be
observed on activation of effector caspase-3 and caspase-7.
Knock-down of CUX1 led to decreased levels of uncleaved
caspase-3 accompanied by an increase of cleaved caspase-3 in
both cell lines after treatment with TRAIL (figure 2A). In
analogy to differences between PANC1 and ImimPC1 cells seen
in FACS and TUNEL assays, CUX1 knock-down alone was
sufficient to induce a marked cleavage of caspase-3 in ImimPC1
cells. In contrast, PANC1 cells further required induction of
apoptosis by TRAIL (figure 2A), indicating that ImimPC1 cells
are more susceptible to undergo spontaneous apoptosis after
CUX1 withdrawal. In addition to detecting differences in
caspase-3 cleavage by immunoblotting, we analysed activation
of caspase-3 and caspase-7 using a specific assay which measures
cleavage of a luminogenic caspase-3/7 substrate. In this assay it
could be confirmed that caspase-3/7 activity was stimulated by
knock-down of CUX1 in both PANC1 (figure 2B) and ImimPC1
cells (figure 2C). siRNA for CUX1 significantly enhanced TRAILinduced
activation of caspase-3/7 in both cell lines (figure 2B, C).
These results indicate that downregulation of CUX1 by
siRNA effectively enhances the sensitivity of pancreatic cancer
cell lines to apoptosis induced by different stimuli that trigger
apoptosis via the extrinsic (TRAIL) or intrinsic (gemcitabine and
5-FU) pathway of apoptosis.

Expression of CUX1 protects from TRAIL-induced apoptosis
To exclude the possibility that only knock-down of endogenous
CUX1 affects apoptosis, for example by withdrawing a transcription
factor required for basal cellular maintenance, we examined
whether overexpression of CUX1 protects from TRAIL-induced
apoptosis. We first chose HEK293 cells, known to be transfectable
with high efficiency, to verify that transient CUX1 overexpression
was able to rescue HEK293 cells from TRAIL-induced
apoptosis (figrue 3A). To confirm the CUX1-induced rescue from
apoptosis also in pancreatic carcinoma cells, we analysed PARP
cleavage after transient overexpression of C-terminal CUX1 in
PANC1 cells. After CUX1 overexpression, TRAIL-induced PARP
cleavage was markedly reduced. Furthermore, we used PANC1
clones stably overexpressing CUX1: in CUX1-overexpressing
clones, TRAIL-induced apoptosis was significantly reduced
compared with mock-transfected clones, as determined by DNA
fragmentation assays (figure 3C). This indicates that CUX1 is
able to rescue cells from TRAIL-induced apoptosis.

Apoptosis pathway-focused gene expression profiling identifies
CUX1-regulated genes
To identify CUX1 target genes involved in apoptosis, we used
a commercial pathway profiler based on quantitative RT-PCR
comprising 84 genes involved in the regulation of apoptosis.
A description of all 84 genes analysed in this profiler is available
online (http://www.sabiosciences.com/rt_pcr_product/
HTML/PAHS-012A.html). ImimPC1 cells transfected with
CUX1 siRNA or non-silencing control siRNA were used to
obtain RNA. The assay was performed three times for each
condition and statistical analysis was performed with the
software accompanying the PCR profiler. Genes that were
significantly regulated by CUX1 are shown in figure 4A.
Interestingly, all genes repressed by CUX1 are involved in the
TNF signalling pathway, including TNFa itself, TNFSF7,
a member of the TNF superfamily, and TNFRSF9, a member of
the TNF receptor superfamily, as well as BIRC3, which has
been shown to be induced by TNFa.
25 In addition to genes
downregulated by CUX1, we identified the antiapoptotic
mitochondrial membrane protein BCL2 as significantly upregulated
by CUX1.

Figure 2 Knock-down of CUX1
increases activity of caspase-3 and
caspase-7. (A) After knock-down of
CUX1 with small interfering RNA
(siRNA), PANC1 and ImimPC1 cells
were treated with TRAIL (tumour
necrosis factor-related apoptosisinducing
ligand) for 20 h. Caspase-3
levels were detected by immunoblotting
using antibodies against uncleaved and
cleaved caspase-3. The blot was
reprobed with the b-actin antibody to
control for equal loading. (B and C)
Caspase-3/7 activity was analysed with
the Caspase-Glo3/7 assay using
a specific substrate in PANC1 (B) and
ImimPC1 (C) cells. Results are
representative for three independent
experiments and are shown as the
mean6SD. *p<0.05 compared with
control cells; **p<0.05 compared to
non-silencing control siRNA (siC)
cells+TRAIL.

1104 Gut 2010;59:1101e1110. doi:10.1136/gut.2009.189720

Pancreas

 on September 2, 2024 at ShanghaiTech University. Protected by copyright. http://gut.bmj.com/ Gut: first published as 10.1136/gut.2009.189720 on 4 May 2010. Downloaded from
To confirm the regulation of BCL2 by CUX1 at the protein
level, we performed immunoblots with or without CUX1
siRNA. Knock-down of CUX1 led to a marked decrease in BCL2
protein levels in both PANC1 and ImimPC1 cells (immunoblot,
figure 4B; semiquantitative densitometry, supplementary figure 4),
corroborating the profiler result at the protein level and
suggesting that CUX1 protects cells from apoptosis by modulating
BCL2 levels as a downstream effector.
The effect of CUX1 on the levels of secreted TNFa could be
verified by a specific ELISA. Knock-down of CUX1 significantly
increased TNFa levels in the supernatant of PANC1 cells
collected over 24 h. This indicates that CUX1 is able to suppress
TNFa expression (figure 4C).
These results suggest that CUX1 initiates a transcriptional
programme which enhances expression of prosurvival factors
and decreases expression of proapoptotic genes, thereby shifting
the balance of proapoptotic and antiapoptotic genes towards cell
death.

CUX1 is regulated by the anti-apoptotic IGF/PI3K/Akt signalling
cascade
After demonstrating the protective effects of CUX1 on
apoptosis, we speculated that CUX1 expression is modulated by
upstream signalling pathways regulating cell survival and resistance
to apoptosis. One of the cardinal signalling cascades in this
context is the Akt/protein kinase B (PKB)-dependent prosurvival
pathway. Various ligands such as IGF1 activate receptor tyrosine
kinases such as IGF1R, which leads to activation of PI3K. PI3K
in turn activates Akt/PKB, which induces effector cascades
resulting in enhanced survival and resistance to apoptosis in
multiple cancers.26
Incubation of ImimPC1 cells with IGF1 resulted in a significant
upregulation of the CUX1 mRNA level which could be
inhibited by co-incubation with the PI3K inhibitor LY294002
(figure 5A). These effects could be confirmed at the protein level

by immunoblotting: IGF1 markedly increased CUX1 protein
levels in both PANC1 and ImimPC1 cells, which was accompanied
by an increase in phosphorylated Akt/PKB (figure 5B;
semiquantitative densitometry, supplementary figure 5). PI3K
inhibition reduced CUX1 protein levels associated with
decreased phosphorylation of Akt/PKB. Co-incubation with
both IGF1 and LY294002 partly reversed the inhibition induced
by LY294002 alone (figure 5B).
To confirm involvement of Akt/PKB downstream of PI3K, we
transiently overexpressed AKT2 in PANC1 cells. Overexpression
of AKT2 increased CUX1 protein levels, confirming direct
involvement of Akt/PKB in the upstream regulation of CUX1
(figure 5C; semiquantitative densitometry, supplementary
figure 6). To examine the relevance of CUX1 as a downstream
effector in PI3K/Akt-induced resistance to apoptosis, we modulated
CUX1 expression either directly by siRNA or by inhibiting
PI3K upstream of CUX1 with LY294002. CUX1 levels inversely
correlated with apoptosis in PANC1 cells, measured by histonebound
DNA fragmentation (figure 5D). Interestingly, the siRNAinduced
decrease in CUX1 was further reduced by PI3K inhibition,
resulting in a further increase in apoptosis. Similarly reduced CUX1
levels, regardless of whether they resulted from direct CUX1
inhibition or from PI3K inhibition, led to comparable apoptosis
rates (figure 5D). In addition, we used PANC1 cells stably overexpressing
the transcriptionally active C-terminal CUX1
compared with mock-transfected control cells. PI3K/Akt inhibition
by LY294002 resulted in significantly increased apoptosis in
mock-transfected cells. However, this effect was markedly
diminished in CUX1-overexpressing cells (figure 5E). These
experiments suggest that CUX1 plays a major role as a downstream
effector of PI3K/Akt-induced protection from apoptosis.

CUX1 is highly expressed in pancreatic cancer tissues
To examine the clinical relevance of CUX1 expression in human
tissues, we performed ISH experiments using a CUX1-specific

Figure 3 CUX1 expression rescues
cells from TRAIL (tumour necrosis
factor-related apoptosis-inducing
ligand)-induced apoptosis. (A) HEK293
cells were transiently transfected with
a full-length CUX1 expression plasmid
or an empty vector. Apoptosis was
induced with TRAIL (50 ng/ml) for 20 h.
DNA fragmentation was measured by
using Cell Death Detection ElisaPLUS.
Results are representative for three
independent experiments and are
shown as the mean6SD. *p<0.05
compared with mock-transfected cells;
**p<0.05 compared with mocktransfected
cells+TRAIL.
(B) Overexpression of CUX1 leads to
decreased poly ADP-ribose polymerase
(PARP) cleavage. PANC1 cells were
transiently transfected with the
transcriptionally active C-terminal CUX1
expression plasmid or an empty vector
and treated with TRAIL for 20 h. PARP
protein was analysed by
immunoblotting with anti-PARP, with
cleaved PARP detected as a smaller
band below the uncleaved form. CUX1 overexpression was confirmed by immunoblotting. The blot was reprobed with the b-actin antibody to assess
equality of loading and is representative for three independent experiments. (C) PANC1 cells stably overexpressing CUX1 or an empty vector were
treated with TRAIL (50 ng/ml) for 20 h. DNA fragmentation was measured by using Cell Death Detection ElisaPLUS. Results are representative for three
independent experiments with two different clones each and are shown as mean6 SD. *p<0.05 compared with control cells.

Gut 2010;59:1101e1110. doi:10.1136/gut.2009.189720 1105

Pancreas

 on September 2, 2024 at ShanghaiTech University. Protected by copyright. http://gut.bmj.com/ Gut: first published as 10.1136/gut.2009.189720 on 4 May 2010. Downloaded from
riboprobe in multiple tissue arrays containing 49 matched pairs
of pancreatic cancer and adjacent normal pancreatic tissues.
CUX1 mRNA expression within the tumour epithelium was
scored as negative or positive by two investigators (RP and PM)
blinded to the H&E sections, as described previously.14 Figure 6A
depicts CUX1 ISH (left panel) and corresponding H&E staining
(right panel) of three representative positive tumour tissues. A
total of 31/49 (63%) of the tumour specimens were scored
positive for CUX1 mRNA as compared with 15/49 (30%) of
benign pancreatic tissues (figure 6B). This indicates that CUX1 is
highly overexpressed in pancreatic cancer tissues. To confirm
CUX1 expression at the protein level, we performed immunohistochemistry
with a CUX1-specific antibody in an independent
series of eight pancreatic cancer and normal pancreatic
tissues. In this series, we could confirm high expression levels of
CUX1 protein in 5/8 cancers compared with normal pancreas
(figure 6C). In tumour tissues, we saw a predominant staining of
the epithelial tumour cells. However, some cells within the
adjacent stroma also appeared to be positive. In normal pancreas
tissues, we detected only a faint staining of normal ducts and, to
a lesser extent, in acinar cells (figure 6C).

Therapeutic targeting of CUX1 by PEI-complexed siRNA reduces
tumour growth and increases apoptosis in vivo
Based on the high expression levels of CUX1 in pancreatic
cancers and given the striking in vitro effects of CUX1 knockdown,
we aimed to investigate the therapeutic efficacy of the

specific knock-down of CUX1 expression in vivo. For the
protection and delivery of siRNA oligonucleotides in vivo, we
used PEI to form nanoscale complexes, which contained either
siRNA oligonucleotides directed against CUX1 (specific treatment
group) or non-silencing oligonucleotides (control group).
For our in vivo experiments, we used the CUX1-positive cell
lines CAPAN1 known to form subcutaneous xenograft tumours
reproducibly in nu/nu mice. CAPAN1 cells treated with siRNA
against CUX1 showed similar in vitro effects on apoptosis to
those described above for PANC1 and ImimPC1 cells (supplementary
figure 7). After establishment of subcutaneous
tumours, CUX-specific PEIesiRNA complexes or non-silencing
control PEIesiRNA complexes were injected intratumourally
three times per week over 3 weeks. Tumour size was measured
regularly at the time points indicated in figure 7A. After sacrificing
the mice, tumours were stained for H&E and CUX1
expression and assessed for apoptosis using the M30 antibody
which detects cleaved cytokeratin-17.
Treatment with CUX1-specific PEIesiRNA complexes resulted
in a significantly decreased tumour volume, as depicted in figure
7A. This was accompanied by a marked reduction in CUX1
expression compared with the control group (tumours treated
with non-specific PEI-complexed siRNAs), as detected by
immunohistochemistry (figure 7B) and quantitative RT-PCR
(figure 7C). Furthermore, we observed a marked increase in
apoptotic cells in CUX1 PEIesiRNA-treated tumours compared
with the control tumours, as detected by staining with the M30
antibody (figure 7D). These results confirm our in vitro data and
demonstrate that reducing CUX1 expression impairs tumour
growth and enhances apoptosis in vivo. As a proof of concept, we
could show that therapeutic targeting of CUX1 by nanoparticlecomplexed
siRNA in vivo reduces tumour growth and is associated
with increased apoptosis.

DISCUSSION
In this study, we could demonstrate that CUX1 plays an important
role in protecting pancreatic cancer cells from apoptosis
induced by various stimuli such as TRAIL and chemotherapeutic
drugs, engaging both the extrinsic and the intrinsic apoptosis
pathways. The prosurvival effect of CUX1 was associated with
upregulation of antiapoptotic proteins such as BCL2 and downregulation
of proapoptotic proteins such as TNFa, thereby
favouring an antiapoptotic state. Furthermore, we identified
CUX1 as a downstream effector of PI3K/Akt signalling,
indicating an important role for CUX1 in PI3K/Akt-mediated
resistance to apoptosis. In vivo, targeting CUX1 by siRNA led to
increased apoptosis and reduced tumour growth in murine
xenograft models. The important role of CUX1 in pancreatic
cancer progression is evidenced by its high expression levels in
pancreatic cancer samples as compared with matched normal
pancreatic tissue.
Our data are in accordance with reports in the literature
suggesting that CUX1 might play a role in modulating
thymocyte cell survival. By constructing a hypomorphic allele of
CUX1, Sinclair et al generated mutant mice lacking the CUX1
HD. Homozygous mice had dramatically reduced thymic cellularity
due to enhanced apoptosis, with a preferential loss of CD4
(+)CD8(+) thymocytes. In contrast to the lymphoid demise,
however, these mice demonstrated myeloid hyperplasia.11
Alcalay et al investigated the effect of a truncated version of
CUX1 lacking Cut repeat-1 (Cux1 CR1) on the progression of
polycystic kidney disease (PKD) by crossing the mutant Cux1
CR1 in a PKD mouse model (Cys1cpk mice).27 Interestingly, Cux1

Figure 4 CUX1 modulates transcription of apoptosis-regulating genes.
(A) ImimPC1 cells were transfected with CUX1 small interfering RNA
(siCUX1) RNA or control small interfering RNA (siC) and expression
profiling of 84 apoptosis pathway-focused genes was performed using
the RT2 Profiler PCR Array System. Results are shown as the expression
ratios between siC/siCUX1-treated cells and are representative for three
independent experiments. (B) Regulation of BCL2 protein analysed by
immunoblotting 48 h after knock-down of CUX1 by siRNA in PANC1 and
ImimPC1 cells. The blot was reprobed with the b-actin antibody to assess
equality of loading. The blot is representative for three independent
experiments. (C) Tumour necrosis factor a (TNFa) protein levels in the
supernatant of PANC1 cells, collected over 24 h, was detected by
specific ELISA after transfection with CUX1 siRNA or siC. Data are
representative for three independent experiments and expressed as the
mean 6 SEM. *p<0.05 compared with control siRNA-transfected cells.

1106 Gut 2010;59:1101e1110. doi:10.1136/gut.2009.189720

Pancreas

 on September 2, 2024 at ShanghaiTech University. Protected by copyright. http://gut.bmj.com/ Gut: first published as 10.1136/gut.2009.189720 on 4 May 2010. Downloaded from
CR1, which lacked CR1 but still contained CR2, CR3 and the
HD, accelerated progression of PKD which was associated with
strong proliferation but also with enhanced apoptosis in cystic
epithelial cells.27 Most probably, the increased apoptosis seen in

this mouse model is a secondary effect due to higher cell turnover.
Our data using CUX1 expression plasmids suggest that the
C-terminal fragment of CUX1 encompassing CR2, CR3 and the
HD is clearly protecting from apoptosis.

Figure 6 CUX1 is highly expressed in
pancreatic cancer tissues. (A) A total of
49 pancreatic tumour tissues and 49
paired adjacent normal pancreatic
tissues were probed with a 35S-labelled
CUX riboprobe by in situ hybridisation
(ISH). Three representative sections of
pancreatic cancer tissues are depicted:
CUX1 expression visualised by dark-field
microscopy (left panel) and
corresponding H&E sections (right
panel). (B) Comparison of CUX1
expression in pancreatic cancer tissue
versus adjacent normal tissue, detected
by ISH and scored as negative or
positive, shown as a percentage of
positive tissues. (C) Representative
immunohistochemical stainings of one
normal pancreatic tissue and one
pancreatic cancer tissue using the rabbit
polyclonal anti-CUX1 antibody. NP,
normal pancreas; PDAC, ductal
adenocarcinomas of the pancreas.

Figure 5 CUX1 mRNA expression is
regulated by insulin-like growth factor 1
(IGF1) and phosphatidylinositol-3-kinase
(PI3K). (A) ImimPC1 cells were treated
with IGF1 (10 ng/ml) and/or the PI3K
inhibitor LY294002 (50 mM) for 24 h.
CUX1 mRNA was quantified by
quantitative real-time PCR (RT-PCR).
CUX1 mRNA levels were normalised to
RPLP0 expression as the housekeeping
gene. *p<0.05 compared with
untreated control cells. Results are
expressed as the mean6SD and are
representative for three independent
experiments. (B) Phospho-Akt and
CUX1 levels were detected by
immunoblotting following treatment
with IGF1 and LY294002 for 15 min
(pAkt) or 20 h (CUX1). The blots were
reprobed with the b-actin antibody to
control for equal loading. The blot is
representative for three independent
experiments. (C) PANC1 cells were
transiently transfected with Akt2-
pcDNA4 expression plasmid or empty
control plasmid. CUX1 and phospho-Akt
levels were detected by immunoblotting after 24 h in 5% serum. b-Actin was used as a marker for equal loading. (D) Apoptosis correlates with CUX1
levels modulated either by PI3K inhibition or by CUX1 small interfering RNA (siRNA) knock-down. PANC1 cells transiently transfected with hCUX1
siRNA (siCUX1) or control siRNA (siControl) were incubated with the PI3K inhibitor LY294002 (50 mM) for 24 h. DNA fragmentation was quantified
using Cell Death Detection ElisaPLUS. CUX1 and b-actin expression was analysed by immunoblotting. Results are representative for three independent
experiments. (E) CUX1 rescues cells from apoptosis induced by PI3K inhibition. PANC1 cells stably overexpressing C-terminal CUX1 were incubated
with LY294002 (50 mM) for 24 h. Apoptosis was quantified by measuring caspase-3 and caspase-7 activities using the luminescent assay CaspaseGlo3/7.
Results are representative for three independent experiments and are shown as the mean6SD. *p<0.05 compared with untreated empty
vector-transfected control cells.

Gut 2010;59:1101e1110. doi:10.1136/gut.2009.189720 1107

Pancreas

 on September 2, 2024 at ShanghaiTech University. Protected by copyright. http://gut.bmj.com/ Gut: first published as 10.1136/gut.2009.189720 on 4 May 2010. Downloaded from
Recently, Truscott et al described proteolytic cleavage of
CUX1 by caspases at its C-terminus. This cleavage was observed
in the absence of apoptotic stimuli and was associated with
increased DNA binding activity, activation of proproliferative
target genes of CUX1 and accelerated entry into S-phase.28 In
that study, which was performed in fibroblasts and T cells,
caspase activity led to enhanced proliferation even in the
absence of apoptosis. The significance of these findings in the
presence of apoptotic stimuli remains to be elucidated. It may be
speculated that, depending on the cellular context, initial
apoptotic stimuli resulting in activation of distinct caspases
might also lead to stimulation of CUX1 activity as a prosurvival
feedback mechanism.
Our results indicate that CUX1 is a downstream target of
PI3K/Akt signalling, one of the cardinal prosurvival pathways
mediating resistance to apoptosis in most malignancies
including gastrointestinal carcinomas.26 We could show that
activation of PI3K/Akt signalling by ligands such as IGF1 led to
transcriptional upregulation of CUX1 at the mRNA and protein
level which could be blocked by inhibition of PI3K. Similar
effects were seen after transfection of constitutively active Akt2,
which has been shown to play an important role in pancreatic
cancer progression.29 Modulating CUX1 levels either directly by
siRNA or by inhibition of PI3K activity led to comparable effects
on CUX1 levels as well as on apoptosis. This suggests that
CUX1 is a major mediator of PI3K/Akt-induced tumour cell
survival. We have not yet addressed which effector pathway
downstream of Akt is utilised for the transcriptional regulation
of CUX1. Several phosphorylation targets of Akt have been
implicated in the regulation of apoptosis, such as FOXO1,30
IKK31 and CREB,32 which are worthwhile candidates to investigate
for interactions with the CUX1 promoter.
To analyse downstream effectors of CUX1 mediating its
prosurvival actions, we employed a quantitative RT-PCR-based

screening approach for key targets known to be involved in the
modulation of apoptosis. We found that CUX1 significantly
upregulates the antiapoptotic protein BCL2 which is localised to
the mitochondrial membrane and inhibits membrane permeabilisation
by interacting with other, partly proapoptotic
members of the same protein family.33 High levels of BCL2 have
been associated with a more aggressive malignant phenotype
and/or drug resistance to various categories of chemotherapeutic
agents in haematological malignancies and solid tumours.33
Transcriptional upregulation of BCL2 may well explain the drugresistent
phenotype induced by CUX1 observed in our cell
systems. In addition, our quantitative RT-PCR screen also
revealed significant downregulation of several genes of the TNF
superfamily including TNFa. It is well known that TNFa plays
a dual role in modulating cancer progression. Depending on the
cellular context, it may be able to promote cell growth and
invasion by activating nuclear factor-kB (NF-kB) signalling.34 35
On the other hand, if NF-kB activation is not successful, TNFa
has been shown to be a potent inducer of cell death by inducing
activation of caspase-8 and sustained JNK (Jun N-terminal
kinase) activation.36 The apoptosis-inducing effect of TNFa has
been confirmed in various cancers including pancreatic cancer.37 38
Further studies are underway to decipher the effects of CUX1-
induced TNFa downregulation in pancreatic cancer.
To evaluate the clinical significance of CUX1 in human
pancreatic cancer specimens, we performed ISHs using a CUX1-
specific probe on a large cohort of pancreatic cancer tissues and
paired adjacent normal pancreatic tissue analysed as MTAs.
Our data indicate that CUX1 is overexpressed in the majority
of pancreatic cancer tissues compared with normal pancreas
tissues. Previously, we showed strong expression of CUX1 in
a large series of breast cancer tissues.14 In this series, CUX1
expression was inversely correlated with patient survival,
indicating a significant impact of CUX1 expression on tumour

Figure 7 Intratumoural application of
polyethylenimine (PEI)-complexed small
interfering RNA (siRNA) reduces tumour
growth associated with increased
apoptosis. (A) Subcutaneous CAPAN1
xenografts were injected intratumourally
with PEI-complexed siRNA against
CUX1 or non-silencing control siRNA
(three times a week over 21 days, 10
tumours per group). Tumour volume was
determined regularly until day 21 after
treatment initiation. Tumour volume was
normalised to the tumour volume on day
1 and is shown as mean6SEM. p<0.05
indicates a significant difference
between both groups as determined by
paired t test/Wilcoxon matched pairs
test. (B) Representative sections of
xenograft tumours treated with
PEIesiRNA against hCUX1 or nonsilencing
control stained with anti-CUX1
mouse monoclonal antibody. Original
magnification 3200. (C) Quantitative
real-time PCR (RT-PCR) of CUX1 mRNA
levels in CUX1 PEIesiRNA-treated
tumours versus control PEIesiRNAtreated
tumours, normalised to RPLP0
expression as the housekeeping gene. *p<0.05 compared with control PEIesiRNA-treated cells. Results are expressed as the mean6SD. (D+E)
Proportion of apoptotic cells per visual field in sections of tumours treated with PEIesiRNA against CUX or control PEIesiRNA, as measured using the
M30 antibody which detects cleaved cytokeratin 17. Two representative pictures (original magnification x200) are shown (D). Five visual fields per
tumour and 10 tumours per group were quantified and shown as mean6SD (E).

1108 Gut 2010;59:1101e1110. doi:10.1136/gut.2009.189720

Pancreas

 on September 2, 2024 at ShanghaiTech University. Protected by copyright. http://gut.bmj.com/ Gut: first published as 10.1136/gut.2009.189720 on 4 May 2010. Downloaded from
progression.14 Since most patients with breast cancer underwent
multiple chemotherapies during the course of their
disease, it may be inferred that inverse correlation of CUX1
with survival is also related to its possible impact on drug
resistance. In our current MTA collection of pancreatic cancer
specimens, data on the clinical follow-up were also available.
However, we could not observe a significant correlation with
survival (data not shown). Most probably this is due to the fact
that overall survival is considerably shorter in pancreatic cancer
compared with breast cancer, precluding the detection of
a statistically significant difference in survival. At the protein
level, we previously had observed strong CUX1 expression in
a small series of pancreatic cancer tissues.14 In our current
series, we could confirm the high expression levels of CUX1
protein in pancreatic tumours compared with normal pancreatic
tissues. Taken together, these expression data suggest
a significant impact of CUX1 in the progression of various
carcinomas including pancreatic cancer.
Based on the high expression of CUX1 in pancreatic cancer
tissues, we sought to determine whether therapeutic targeting
of CUX1 impacts on tumour growth and apoptosis in vivo. By
using a xenograft model, we could show that therapeutic
application of CUX1 siRNA in subcutaneous tumours reduced
tumour growth and increased the rate of apoptosis in the
tumours. This indicates that CUX1 plays an important role in
promoting tumour cell survival in vivo. Interestingly, therapeutic
targeting of CUX1 expression also significantly enhances
apoptosis in vivo, resulting in decreased tumour growth.
In summary, our data indicate that CUX1 represents an
important survival factor downstream of PI3K/Akt, which
orchestrates a transcriptional programme mediating resistance
to apoptosis in pancreatic cancer. If therapeutic targeting of
transcription factors becomes technically more feasible, for
example by optimising strategies for systemic delivery of
siRNAs, CUX1 would be a promising candidate. Moreover,
screening experiments are currently underway in our group to
identify further downstream effectors of CUX1, mediating
its effects on tumour cell survival. These effectors can be
explored as druggable targets to overcome the highly drugresistant
phenotype of pancreatic cancer, which determines
the current appalling outcome of patients suffering from this
tumour.

