401

Over recent years the investigation of DNA repair pathways
is a very attractive area of research. It is well known that cells
have a number of overlapping pathways to protect the genome
from DNA damage. Mutations that occur within these pathways
represent an increased risk of malignant transformation and
chemotherapy resistance [1]. Despite much research has focused
on protecting cells from DNA damage and restoring their repair
function, the concept of „synthetic lethality“, that is, exploiting
the vulnerability of tumor cells which have lost one DNA repair
pathway by targeting a second repair pathway, is emerging and
represents an interesting therapeutic approach [2].
Breast cancer is the leading cause of cancer incidence and the
second leading cause of cancer mortality in women. Germline mutations
of the breast tumor suppressor genes BRCA1 and BRCA2
have been found to contribute to the most of the familial breast
cancer cases [3, 4]. Recent evidence suggests that tumor cells which
have lost BRCA1 or BRCA2, components essential for DNA repair
by homologous recombination (HR), are particularly sensitive to
inhibitors of base excision repair pathway (BER) [5]. Poly(ADPribose)
polymerase-1 (PARP-1) is an enzyme which plays an
important role in the recognition and repair of single-strand DNA
breaks (SSBs) via BER [6]. Thus, targeted therapy using PARP-1
inhibitors has become an important novel strategy for treating
tumor cells with deficiency in BRCA1 or BRCA2.

BRCA1 and BRCA2. BRCA1 and BRCA2 play important
roles in the repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) by HR.
This error-free pathway is used to repair DSBs that occur in late
S/G2
 phase of the cell cycle as well as to repair DSBs resulting
from unrepaired SSBs. BRCA1 signals the presence of DSBs,
while BRCA2 has a direct role in repair itself by driving RAD51
to the DSB site. Following recognition of DSBs, BRCA1 is phosphorylated
and leads to activation of DSB repair by HR [7–9].
In the absence of functional BRCA1 or BRCA2, cells become
unable to undergo DNA repair by HR and activate the nonhomologous
end joining and single-strand non-homologous
end joining annealing pathways, which are error-prone and
result in chromosomal instability or cell death (Figure 1).
Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1). PARP-1 is the
first characterized and the best known member of the PARP
family, which currently comprises 18 members [10]. PARP-1 is
an abundant nuclear enzyme implicated in cellular responses
to DNA injury provoked by genotoxic stress, in transcriptional
regulation, and in regulation of cell survival and cell death. It
binds to nicked DNA as a homodimer and mediates protection
of DNA. Upon binding to DNA breaks, it cleaves NAD+
into nicotinamide and ADP-ribose moieties and polymerizes
the latter through surface accessible glutamate residues
onto nuclear acceptor proteins. When DNA is mildly damNeoplasma
57, 5, 2010

doi:10.4149/neo_2010_05_401

PARP-1 inhibitors: a novel genetically specific agents for cancer therapy

Minireview

L. CIPAK1
, S. JANTOVA2

1
Cancer Research Institute, Slovak Academy of Sciences, Bratislava, Slovakia, exoncip@savba.sk, 2
Institute of Biochemistry, Nutrition and Health
Protection, Faculty of Chemical and Food Technology, Slovak University of Technology, Bratislava, Slovakia

Received February 5,2010

The nuclear poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) represents an important novel target in cancer therapy. The enzyme
is essential for single strand DNA breaks repair via base excision repair pathway. Inhibition of PARP-1 exerts „synthetic
lethality“ effect towards the tumors with defects in DNA repair by homologous recombination, specifically the tumors with
mutations in the breast cancer associated BRCA1 and BRCA2 genes. Recent clinical data confirmed the early in vitro studies
and suggest that PARP-1 inhibitors could be used not only as chemosensitizers but as well as single agents to selective kill
tumors with defective DNA repair by homologous recombination. Such concept of „synthetic lethality“ for tumors which have
lost one DNA repair pathway by targeting a second DNA repair pathway, represents groundbreaking therapeutic strategy.
The review highlights our current knowledge and ongoing clinical development/trials of PARP-1 inhibitors.

Key words: PARP-1 inhibitor, BRCA1, BRCA2, DNA repair, synthetic lethality
402 L. CIPAK, S. JANTOVA

aged, PARP-1 is activated and participates in BER through
formation of repair multiprotein complex with DNA ligase
III, XRCC protein and DNA polymerase β. However, in the
case of extensive DNA damage, PARP-1 is overactivated and
induces a depletion of cellular NAD+ and ATP level, leading
to cell dysfunction or necrotic cell death [11–13]. Moreover,
tumor cells with low cellular ATP level are highly resistant to
apoptosis due to its energetic requirements and in these cells
antitumor drugs could induce cell demise by necrosis only.
Interestingly, cells may be protected from necrosis by inhibition
or inactivation of PARP-1 in the absence of extensive cell
damage [14, 15].
Due to the dual response of PARP-1 to DNA damage and
its participation in cell death signaling, pharmacological
modulation of PARP-1 activity constitutes a useful tool to
increase the activity of DNA-binding antitumor drugs. This
idea is supported by numerous studies demonstrating that
PARP-1 inhibitors kill BRCA1 and BRCA2 deficient cells with
extremely high efficiency while BRCA-competent cells are
relatively unsensitive to the treatment [16–18]. It is therefore
proposed that PARP-1 inhibitors are the long-sought genetically
specific drugs that are both safe and effective for treating
BRCA1 and BRCA2-associated breast cancers.
PARP-1 inhibitors. The discovery of PARP-1 inhibitors
was initially based on empirical, high-throughput screening,
followed by optimization of chemical modifications based on
structure-based design.
First generation inhibitors, nicotinamide and 3-aminobenzamide
(3-AB), were identified as competitive PARP-1
inhibitors [19]. Nicotinamide is a weak PARP-1 inhibitor and
at millimolar concentrations interferes with NAD+ synthesis.
3-AB is more effective than nicotinamide, but has limited
solubility in water. Futhermore, it has several drawbacks as
drug candidate. It lacks the potency and specificity required
to make it therapeutically useful, has limited intracellular accumulation
and exerts non-specific actions, such as inhibition

of mono and poly(ADP-ribosyl)ation reactions. In addition,
the doses of the compound required for reaching an effective
PARP-1 inhibition in vivo are too high for safe human
administration. Therefore, nicotinamide and 3-AB are used
mainly as experimental tools to investigate the biological role
of PARP-1 activation in cellular processes [20, 21].
The results of PARP-1 inhibition using first generation
inhibitors and better understanding of the PARP-1 function,
led to the development of second generation of potent PARP-1
inhibitors, e.g. dihydroisoquinolinones and isoquinolinones.
These drugs lack some drawbacks of first generation inhibitors.
Their structure is based on the structure of 3-AB with
the carboxamide group attached within a ring structure. They
have improved PARP-1 inhibition compared to the 3-AB and
are able to reduce DNA repair and enhance cell death when
combined with anticancer drugs [22, 23].
Taking into account the structural requirements for PARP1
inhibition, the third generation inhibitors derived from
benzamidazoles, e.g. benzimidazole-4-carboxamides and benzoxazole-4-carboxamides
were designed and tested. Results
proved that these compounds are considerably more active
than 3-AB [24–26]. Additionally, the structurally modified
derivative of these drugs, 2-(4-hydroxyphenyl)-1H-benzimidazole-4-carboxamide
(NU1085), potentiates by about 3-fold the
cytotoxicity of the monofunctional alkylating agent temozolomide
and of the topoisomerase I inhibitor topotecan. Because
of the potency, easy synthesis and good solubility in water, this
drug has been adopted as a standard PARP-1 inhibitor [27].
Another group of third generation inhibitors is represented by
derivatives of phthalazin-1(2H)-one, particularly its methyl,
ethyl or benzyl substituents. Biological evaluation of these
compounds revealed that they are potent PARP-1 inhibitors
with nanomolar inhibitory activity and good metabolic stability
[28, 29]. Structurally related quinazolinones were derived
from these phthalazinones through the union of the second
ring nitrogen. Quinazolin-4-ones and quinazoli-2,4-dione

Figure 1: Loss of DNA repair by homologous recombination pathway (HR) affects the choice of DNA double-strand break (DSB) repair pathway. In
normal cells DSBs are repaired predominantly by HR. In HR-deficient cells alternative pathways, such nonhomologous end-joining (NHEJ) and singlestrand
annealing (SSA) repair pathways, are activated.
PARP-1 INHIBITORS IN CANCER THERAPY. MINIREVIEW 403

show PARP-1 inhibition, with IC50 values of about 10 μM [30].
Most potent derivative 8-hydroxy-2-methylquinazolin-4(3H)-
one (NU1025) is about 10-fold more effective than 3-AB, and
enhances the action of alkylating agents (with IC50 value of 0.4
μM) [31]. So far, phenanthridinones are reported as the most
potent PARP-1 inhibitors [32]. For example N-(6-oxo-5,6-dihydrophenanthridin-2-yl)-2-(N,N-dimethylamino)
acetamide
(PJ 34) showed PARP-1 inhibition, with IC50 values from 0.3
μM to 1 μM. Futhermore, this drug protects neuron against
oxygen and glucose deprivation, and is also useful against
various diseases including inflammatory processes and allergic
encephalomyelitis [33].
PARP-1 inhibitors as chemosensitizers. It has been shown
that increased PARP-1 activity is one of the mechanisms by
which tumor cells avoid apoptosis caused by DNA-damaging
agents. As PARP-1 is essential for the repair of SSBs through the
BER pathway, its inhibition sensitizes tumor cells to cytotoxic
therapy (e.g. temozolomide, cisplatin, topoisomerase I inhibitors,
or irradiation), which induce DNA damage that would
normally be repaired through the BER pathway. A significant
window seems to exist between the ability of PARP-1 inhibitors
to potentiate therapeutic benefit versus potentiation of
undesirable side effects. Interestingly, PARP-1 inhibitors have
not potentiated agents that do not damage DNA. Moreover,
there did not seem to be a correlation between the antitumor
activity and the toxicity of the PARP-1 inhibitor-DNA damaging
agent combinations. Instead, it looks like the toxicity and
chemosensitization are driven by different mechanisms.
PARP inhibitors in the treatment of DNA repair deficiencyrelated
cancers. Despite PARP-1 inhibitors are promising
chemosensitizers in combination with antitumor drugs, they
appear to be particularly potent as well as single agents in
patients who have defects in DNA repair. Usually, in normal
cells, PARP-1 inhibition leads to failure of SSB repair, resulting

in the formation of DSBs in the DNA when a replication fork
encounters the SSBs [34]. Generated DSBs can be repaired by
HR and the fidelity of the genome is maintained. However, if
cells carry defects in BRCA1 or BRCA2, DSB repair by HR is
defective, resulting in an attempted repair of the DSBs by the
more error prone pathways. As a result, the cells acquire lethal
levels of DNA damage and cellular viability is lost. The effect of
this “synthetic lethality” represents a powerful tool to treat the
tumor cells with defective of one DNA repair mechanism (e.g.
HR) by ceasing the functionality of a second repair pathway
(e.g. BER) [2]. As most BRCA1 and BRCA2 carriers have one
normal allele, the inhibition of BER through the inhibition of
PARP-1 should be preferentially selective for tumor cells. This
idea was comfirmed by studies using different chemical classes
of PARP-1 inhibitors [5, 16]. Results clearly demonstrated that
both BRCA1 and BRCA2 deficient tumor cells are sensitive to
inhibition of PARP-1, and that BRCA2 deficient cells are more
than 1000 times more sensitive to nanomolar concentrations
of PARP-1 inhibitors [17]. These studies confirmed that tumor
cells with deficiency in BRCA1 and BRCA2 are sensitive to the
mechanism of PARP-1 inhibition due to defective repair of
DSBs by HR, whereas the rest of the patient’s cells are insensitive.
Additionally, recent study showed that cells deficient in
phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), tumor supressor
gene function in HR, are hypersensitive to PARP-1 inhibitors
as well [35]. This suggests that assessment of PARP-1 inhibitors
might be extended beyond BRCA-deficient cells to a larger
group of patients that are defective in DNA repair by HR.
PARP-1 inhibitors in clinical trials. The profound sensitivity
of BRCA1 and BRCA2 mutant cells to PARP-1 inhibition has
led to the development of a number of clinical trials to test the
efficiency of this approach. Currently, several PARP-1 inhibitors
have entered the clinical trials [36]. Their current status
is summarized in Table 1.

Table 1: PARP-1 inhibitors in clinical trials (according to http://clinicaltrials.gov/)

Agent Combination with Disease Clinical status

BSI-201 Irinotecan, topotecan, temozolomide, Advanced solid tumors, malignant Phase I - II
gemcitabine, carboplatin/paclitaxel glioma, uterine carcinosarcoma
Gemcitabine, carboplatin Triple negative metastatic breast cancer Phase II - III
AG-014699 Single agent Locally advanced or metastatic breast cancer
andadvanced ovarian cancer
Phase II

Carboplatin, paclitaxel, cisplatin Advanced solid tumors Phase I
Pemetrexed
INO-1001 Temozolomide Melanoma Phase I
MK-4827 Single agent Advanced solid tumors Phase I
KU-0059436 Carboplatin, paclitaxel, cisplatin Triple negative metastatic Phase I - II

Phase I

CEP-9722 Single agent Advanced solid tumors Phase I
ABT-888 Temozolomide Metastatic breast cancer Phase II
Carboplatin, topotecan Leukemia, myelodysplastic syndromes Phase I – II
cyclophosphamide, doxorubicin
Mitomycin C Metastatic solid tumors Phase I
Temozolomide Melanoma, breast cancer Phase II
Topotecan, carboplatin, paclitaxel Ovarian cancer Phase I - II
404 L. CIPAK, S. JANTOVA

The ongoing clinical trials focuse on the treatment of BRCA
mutation carriers, particularly those with breast, ovarian, or
prostate cancer, with PARP-1 inhibitors as single-agents or in
combination with several DNA damaging agents. From the
current data, it is becoming clear that PARP-1 inhibitors are
useful chemosensitizers not only in patients whose tumors
exhibit BRCA deficiency, but they are effective as well for
those tumors exhibiting the HR defects in general, including
triple-negative (estrogen-, progesterone-, HER2-receptor
negative) breast cancer, known as an aggressive subtype of
breast cancer.
Resistance to PARP-1 inhibitors. Despite of the potency of
PARP-1 inhibitors, the cancer cells could develop the resistance
to these agents. Recent studies suggest that resistance
of highly sensitive BRCA2 deficient cells to PARP-1 inhibitors
is caused by genetic reversion that leads to restoration
of open reading frame of BRCA2. Such cells become HR
competent [37]. The identical mechanism of resistance was
observed as well for carboplatin resistant tumors [38]. It
is likely that a similar mechanism may cause resistance to
PARP-1 inhibitors in BRCA1 mutation carriers. So far it is
not yet clear whether a wide range of BRCA mutations can
also be reverted in a similar fashion. Additionally, mutation
reversion seems to be not the only route leading to PARP-1
inhibitors resistance. Recent study showed that in addition
to genes known to be involved in HR, some kinases such as
MAPK12, STK36, STK22c and CDK5, also modify sensitivity
of tumor cells to PARP-1 inhibitors [39]. That suggests,
that other genes except of genes involved in HR might be
used as well to sensitize the tumor cells to chemotherapy.
Inhibition of these genes could increase the efficacy of
PARP-1 inhibitors helping to prevent or even overcome
PARP-1 resistance.
In conclusion, PARP-1 inhibitors provide a major advance
in the treatment of BRCA1 and BRCA2 associated
breast cancers. Due to „synthetic lethality“ effect against
tumor cells with deficiency in HR, they are the long-sought
genetically specific drugs that are both safe and effective.
Futher advancement in understanding of the molecular
mechanism of HR deficiency in cells with no BRCA1 and
BRCA2 mutations but with sensitivity to PARP-1 inhibitors,
will be very useful for revealing full therapeutic potential
of these inhibitors. Additionally, the ongoing preclinical research
will undoubtedly help in discovery and development
of new and more potent PARP-1 inhibitors with potential
to futher improve response rates while causing fewer treatment-related
toxicities.

