Therapeutics, Targets, and Chemical Biology

Synthetic Lethality through Combined Notch–Epidermal
Growth Factor Receptor Pathway Inhibition in
Basal-Like Breast Cancer

Yiyu Dong1
, Aimin Li1
, Jianbo Wang1
, Jason D. Weber1,2,3, and Loren S. Michel1,2,3

Abstract
Basal-like breast cancers (BLBC) are highly aggressive, yet selective therapies targeting the specific oncoproteins
driving these tumors have not been developed. These cancers frequently express epidermal growth
factor receptor (EGFR), with resistance to its inhibition being well documented, albeit poorly understood.
Notch pathway activation is also common in this breast cancer subtype and can be suppressed by γ-secretase
inhibitors, which effectively block receptor cleavage and activation. Herein, we show that although inhibition
of either EGFR or Notch signaling alone is insufficient to suppress basal-like breast tumor cell survival and
proliferation, simultaneous inhibition uncovers a synthetic lethal relationship between these two oncogenic
pathways. This lethality is due in part to significant decreases in AKT activation caused by combined EGFR
and Notch inhibition. Expression of the activated form of Notch1 restores AKT activity and enables cells to
overcome cell death after dual-pathway blockade. Combined pathway inhibition is also dramatically more
effective at suppressing tumor growth in mice than blocking EGFR or Notch signaling alone. Thus, we show
that Notch pathway activation contributes to resistance to EGFR inhibition, and provide a novel treatment
strategy for BLBCs. Cancer Res; 70(13); 5465–74. ©2010 AACR.

Introduction

The identification of breast cancer subtypes has resulted
in a refinement in prognostic capability and promises to result
in the development of more selective, molecularly targeted
therapies that possess improved efficacy (1, 2). The
basal-like breast cancer (BLBC) subtype constitutes ∼15%
of tumors and is characterized by the absence of expression
of estrogen receptor (ER) and progesterone receptor (PR)
and Her2/neu amplification (and is therefore also referred
to as “triple negative”). Unlike ER- and PR-positive or Her2/
neu-amplified cancers, no targeted therapies exist for these
tumors. In general, they are highly aggressive relative to other
subtypes (2). Metastases tend to arise in the visceral organs
as opposed to bone, and a rapid progression from recurrence
to death is common (3, 4). This poor prognosis is due in part
to the lack of available therapeutics targeting the specific
pathways responsible for their aggressive behavior. In contrast,
targeted therapeutics have had a profound effect on
survival in other subtypes (5).
BLBCs, unlike other subtypes, commonly show expression
of the epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR; HER1), one
of the four HER kinase family of receptors (6). Unrestrained
activation of EGFR leads to dysregulated proliferation and
transformation in experimental systems, and activating mutations
have been observed in human brain (7) and lung (8)
tumors. Ligand engagement of EGFR results in homodimerization
and heterodimerization with other members of the
HER family, resulting in intrinsic kinase activation. This activation
leads to stimulation of the Ras–Raf–mitogen-activated
protein kinase (MAPK)/extracellular signal-regulated kinase
(ERK) kinase–MAPK pathway, promoting multiple cellular
processes, including proliferation, invasion, and suppression
of apoptosis (9). Because of the compelling genetics and
biochemistry suggesting an essential role for EGFR signaling
in some cancers, highly specific small-molecule inhibitors
and antibodies have been developed against EGFR and have
shown efficacy against lung, colon, and head and neck cancer
(10). Unfortunately, these inhibitors have shown only limited
clinical activity against breast cancers, even when inhibition
of EGFR phosphorylation has been documented in vivo (11).
One possible explanation for these observations is that complementary
pathways exist that confer intrinsic resistance to
EGFR inhibition in breast cancer.
The Notch pathway has also been shown to be hyperactivated
in BLBCs (12, 13), and Notch receptors are oncogenic
in the mammary gland (14, 15). During development, Notch
receptors function in a tissue-specific manner to regulate cell

Authors' Affiliations: 1Division of Oncology, Department of Internal
Medicine, 2Department of Cell Biology and Physiology, and 3The Alvin
J. Siteman Cancer Center, Washington University School of Medicine,
St. Louis, Missouri
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Cancer
Research Online (http://cancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
Corresponding Author: Loren Michel, Washington University School of
Medicine, Campus Box 8069, St. Louis, MO 63110. Phone: 314-362-
8965; Fax: 314-747-9320; E-mail: lmichel@dom.wustl.edu.
doi: 10.1158/0008-5472.CAN-10-0173
©2010 American Association for Cancer Research.

Cancer
Research

www.aacrjournals.org 5465

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/cancerres/article-pdf/70/13/5465/2637337/5465.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
fate, proliferation, survival, and cell death (16). The four
Notch receptors are activated by two intramembranous
cleavage events, the first being dependent on ADAM metalloproteinase
and the second dependent on the γ-secretase
holoenzyme consisting of presenilin/nicastrin/APH-1/PEN-2
subunits (17). After the second cleavage event, the intracellular
domain of the receptor (NICD) translocates to the nucleus
and interacts with RBP-Jκ and Mastermind to generate a
large transcriptional complex (18). Notch1 promotes an aggressive
phenotype in breast cancer cells through several mechanisms.
It has been implicated in survival signaling by
activation of AKT (19, 20) and survivin (21), resulting in chemoresistance.
Notch signaling is involved in resistance to
Herceptin in Her2/neu-amplified breast cancer (22). Notch
can provoke an epithelial-to-mesenchymal transition in carcinoma
cells (23), which recently has been shown to drive the
intrinsically chemoresistant breast cancer stem cell phenotype.
Because of the hyperactivation of the Notch pathway
and its relationship to cell survival in breast and other tumors,
highly specific γ-secretase inhibitors (GSI) are in clinical
development, but whether these are cytotoxic or not in
breast cancer is unclear (24).
Cross talk between the EGFR and Notch pathways has
been identified in lung (25), skin cancers (26), and gliomas
(27). Because BLBCs frequently show constitutive hyperactivation
of both pathways, we sought to determine how signaling
from these pathways might converge by assessing the
effects of dual-pathway inhibition in this subtype of cancer.
We found that whereas neither pathway alone is essential for
proliferation or cell survival, dual inhibition using γ-secretase
and EGFR inhibitors results in a marked decrease in proliferation,
a dramatic increase in cell death, and significantly reduced
tumor growth in a xenograft model of BLBC. This loss
of viability is due to a role for Notch1 in sustaining AKT activity,
whose activation is an established mechanism of resistance
to treatment with EGFR inhibitors (28). Expression of
an activated Notch1 intracellular domain (NICD1) in the
presence of both inhibitors restored AKT activity and cell viability.
These data show that Notch signaling contributes to
the observed resistance to EGFR inhibition in breast cancer
and that combined Notch-EGFR pathway inhibition is a
rational treatment strategy for BLBCs.

Materials and Methods

Cell culture and reagents
The HCC1806 and HCC1937 cells were provided by Dr. M.
Ellis (Washington University), and MDA-MB-468 and MDAMB-231
cells were purchased from the American Type Culture
Collection. These cell lines have been reported to be
triple negative (29), and we confirmed that their Her2/neu
status is negative (Supplementary Fig. S1A). HCC1806 and
HCC1937 were grown in RPMI 1640 containing 10% fetal bovine
serum with antibiotics and supplements (10 mmol/L
HEPES, 4.5 g/L glucose, 2 mmol/L L-glutamine, and
1 mmol/L sodium pyruvate). MDA-MB-468 and MDA-MB231
cells were maintained in DMEM supplemented with
10% fetal bovine serum and 1% penicillin. All cell lines were

incubated at 37°C with 5% CO2 in a humidified incubator.
Drugs were purchased from Calbiochem (DAPT, used at
10 μmol/L; ref. 30), Alexis [compound E, used at 10 μmol/L
(31) or 3 mg/kg in vivo (32)], and Axon Medchem [gefitinib,
used at 3 μmol/L or 150 mg/kg in vivo (28), and erlotinib,
used at 5 μmol/L (28)].

Constructs and transfections
NICD1 was excised from pYY161, a gift from J. Aster (Harvard
University), and cloned into pBabe-puro vector by EcoRI
and SalI. pBabe-Puro-Myr-Flag-AKT1 was purchased from
Addgene. Short hairpins targeting human nicastrin with
the sequences 5′-CCCATCTTTCTTCTTGAAGAT-3′ and
5′-GCTCTACTGAATACTCTACAT-3′ were cloned into the
lentiviral vector pLKO-puro (provided by Sheila Stewart,
Washington University). Retroviral and lentiviral infections
were carried out as previously described using FuGENE 6
transfection reagent (Roche) according to the manufacturer's
instructions (33). Infected cells were selected in 2 μg/mL
puromycin.

Immunoblot analysis and antibodies
Total cell protein was extracted with 1× NP40 buffer,
which includes 0.5% NP40 supplemented with protease inhibitor
cocktail (Roche). Lysates were cleared by centrifugation
and protein concentration was tested by the Bradford
assay (Bio-Rad). Lysates were boiled with SDS sample buffer,
separated by SDS-PAGE, and transferred to polyvinylidene difluoride
membrane (Millipore). Western blots were blocked
in 5% nonfat dry milk TBS-T [10 mmol/L Tris-HCl (pH 7.4),
150 mmol/L NaCl, 0.1% Tween 20] buffer and incubated in
primary antibodies diluted in blocking buffer at 4°C overnight.
Blots were washed with TBS-T buffer and incubated
with horseradish peroxidase–conjugated secondary antibodies
(1:10,000; GE Healthcare) in blocking buffer at room
temperature. Immunocomplexes were visualized with an enhanced
chemiluminescence kit (GE Healthcare). Primary
antibodies for immunodetection were sourced as follows:
cleaved Notch1 (Val1744), nicastrin, phospho-AKT (Ser473),
AKT, MAPK (ERK1/2), phospho-MAPK (phospho-ERK1/2),
cleaved caspase-3, Her2/neu, EGFR, and phospho-EGFR (Cell
Signaling Technology) and actin (Sigma).

Proliferation assay
Cells were seeded at 20% to 30% confluence in 6-cm
dishes. Twenty-four hours later, cells were placed in fresh
medium containing indicated concentration of drugs and allowed
to grow for 6 days. Cells were harvested by trypsinization,
and the viable cell number was counted with the trypan
blue exclusion method at indicated time points.

DNA replication assay
Measurement of bromodeoxyuridine (BrdUrd) incorporation
was performed according to the manufacturer's recommendations.
Briefly, cells were grown on coverslip and
treated with indicated drugs for 4 days. Then, BrdUrd
(Sigma) was added to cells with a final concentration of
20 μmol/L and incubated for 2 hours at 37°C. Cells on coverslip

Dong et al.

5466 Cancer Res; 70(13) July 1, 2010 Cancer Research

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/cancerres/article-pdf/70/13/5465/2637337/5465.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
were fixed with 4% paraformaldehyde for 30 minutes at room
temperature, washed three times with PBS, and permeabilized
with 0.25% Triton X-100. Subsequently, cells were incubated in
1.5 N HCl at room temperature for 10 minutes. After HCl incubation,
the slide was washed with PBS and blocked with blocking
buffer (2% goat serum in PBS-T) at 37°C for 30 minutes.
Monoclonal mouse anti-BrdUrd (BD Pharmingen) was applied
to the slide in blocking buffer for 30 minutes at 37°C. Slides
were then washed with PBS three times and incubated in
blocking buffer with secondary antibody, Alexa Fluor 568–
labeled goat anti-mouse IgG (Invitrogen), for 30 minutes at
37°C. 4′,6-Diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI) was used to
counter stain nuclei. A fluorescence microscope with appropriate
filter sets was used to detect BrdUrd and DAPI
fluorescence. The software ImageJ was used to count the
BrdUrd-stained cells.

Cell death assay
Cell death was assessed by TUNEL assay with an In Situ
Cell Death Detection Kit, TMR Red (Roche) and Annexin V
assay with the Vybrant Apoptosis Assay Kit #3 (Invitrogen).
Briefly, after drug treatment, cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde.
Cell labeling was performed according to the
manufacturer's instructions. DAPI was used to counterstain
nuclei. Terminal deoxynucleotidyl transferase–mediated
dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL)– or Annexin V–positive
cells were detected with a fluorescence microscope, and cell
number was counted by the ImageJ software. At least 200
cells were counted for each experiment.

Clonogenic assay
HCC1806 cells (1 × 103
) were seeded in 10-cm tissue culture
dishes and grown for 24 hours at 37°C, at which time
DMSO, DAPT, gefitinib, or combinations were added daily
for 4 days. Then, 1 × 103 cells were seeded in the absence
of drugs in 10-cm dishes. Colonies were allowed to grow
for 14 days in the absence of drug, washed with PBS, and
fixed in a mixture of 6.0% glutaraldehyde and 0.5% crystal
violet for 30 minutes. Tissue culture dishes were rinsed with
tap water and air dried overnight, and colonies >1 mm were
scored as positive.

Animal studies
Animals were handled according to protocols approved by
the Washington University Animal Studies Committee.
HCC1806 cells (5 × 105
) were mixed 1:1 with Matrigel (BD
Biosciences) and injected s.c. into the flank of 6-week-old female
nude mice. When tumors reached 50 to 100 mm3 in volume,
mice were randomized and treated with vehicle and
drugs. Compound E (3 mg/kg) was injected i.p. 5 days a week.
Gefitinib was dissolved in DMSO [10% (v/v) final concentration]
and diluted in carboxymethylcellulose (0.25, w/v) to a
final concentration of 20 mg/mL. Gefitinib was administered
by oral gavage (150 mg/kg) 5 days a week. Mice were weighed
and tumors were measured with caliper twice weekly. Tumor
volumes were calculated with the following formula: 0.5 ×
LW2 (with L and W representing the length and width of
tumors, respectively).

Results

Combined γ-secretase and EGFR inhibition results in
decreased proliferation and cell death in BLBC cells
Both the Notch and EGFR pathways have been implicated
in proliferation and cell survival in some cancers. In breast
cancer, pharmacologic inhibition of γ-secretase has previously
been considered cytotoxic (21, 34), but this contention
has recently been disputed because more selective GSIs administered
at doses that do not inhibit proteasome function
failed to induce a cytotoxic effect in a wide panel of breast
cancer cell lines (24).
We treated the BLBC cell line HCC1806 with the specific
GSI, DAPT, at a dose (10 μmol/L) that suppressed γ-secretase
activity as judged by the inability to detect Notch cleavage
using a cleavage-specific Notch1 antibody, Val1744, after
treatment (Fig. 1A). Within 4 days of treatment, cleaved
Notch was no longer detectable by immunoblot analysis. In
agreement with the recent report in which selective GSIs
were shown to lack cytotoxicity against breast cancer cells
(24), enumeration of cell numbers revealed only a modest decrease
in cell growth even after 6 days of treatment (Fig. 1B).
In addition, in accord with previously published reports (35),
3 μmol/L, a dose of gefitinib capable of inhibition of phospho-EGFR,
had only a modest effect on growth. In contrast,
simultaneous treatment with both drugs caused a dramatic
decrease in growth at doses that had negligible effects when
used as single agents (Fig. 1B). Colony-forming assays confirmed
the decrease of longer-term growth potential (Supplementary
Fig. S2), consistent with the loss of proliferative
capacity measured in short-term culture. To extend this finding
and determine whether the observed synergistic loss of
growth potential after combined pathway inhibition is common
to other BLBC cell lines, we subjected MDA-MB-468
and HCC1937 BLBC cells to the same treatment regimens
and confirmed the ability of DAPT to block Notch cleavage
in these cells (Fig. 1A). After single treatment with DAPT or
gefitinib, we observed only modest reductions in growth similar
to what has previously been reported (35). Notch inhibition
did not change total EGFR or phospho-EGFR protein
levels, and gefitinib treatment did not reduce total Notch
protein levels (Supplementary Fig. S1B). Importantly, we confirmed
the dramatic suppression of cell growth after combined
drug treatment in these two additional cell lines
(Fig. 1B), indicating that the combined inhibition of Notch
and EGFR pathways results in significant reductions in
cell proliferation.
Mutations in Ras, which signals downstream of EGFR,
have recently been shown to confer resistance to EGFR inhibitors
in colon cancer (36). MDA-MB-231 BLBC cells harbor
Ras pathway mutations (37). Based on this mutational status,
MDA-MB-231 cells should be refractory to dual-pathway inhibition
because Ras signaling downstream of EGFR would
contribute to cell survival even in the presence of Notch
and EGFR inhibition. Testing this possibility, we found that
these cells were indeed refractory to dual-pathway inhibition,
showing no growth or proliferative defects after combination
treatment (Fig. 1A and B).

Dual Notch-EGFR Pathway Inhibition in Basal-Like Breast Cancer

www.aacrjournals.org Cancer Res; 70(13) July 1, 2010 5467

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/cancerres/article-pdf/70/13/5465/2637337/5465.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
Next, we determined whether the effect of combined pathway
inhibition on cell proliferation was due to a requirement
for concurrent Notch and EGFR signaling in S-phase entry
and/or cell death. Cells were pulsed with BrdUrd to allow
for its incorporation into replicating DNA and stained with
antibodies recognizing BrdUrd to assess the S-phase fraction
in response to GSI, gefitinib, or combination treatment. No
significant changes in S phase were observed after 4 days
of treatment with either drug alone (Fig. 1C). However, in
all three sensitive cell lines, combination treatment caused
a dramatic reduction in the number of cells entering S phase,
whereas it showed no effect on the resistant MDA-MB-231

cell line (Fig. 1C). To further analyze the mechanism underlying
the observed loss of cell growth on dual Notch-EGFR
pathway inhibition, we sought to determine whether combined
treatment could cause cell death. After combination
treatment for 4 days, a significant increase in cell death
was observed and quantified by terminal deoxynucleotidyl
transferase dUTP nick end labeling (TUNEL), whereas
single-drug treatment had no measurable effect (Fig. 2). Increased
apoptosis was also measurable as early as 2 days after
dual-pathway inhibition using Annexin V staining (Supplementary
Fig. S3). By immunoblot analysis of protein lysates
harvested 2 days after the various drug exposures

Figure 1. Effects of combined γ-secretase–EGFR inhibition on growth of BLBC cells. A, immunoblot analysis using an antibody specific for the cleaved form
(Val1744) of Notch1 shows near-complete inhibition of Notch cleavage after 4 d of 10 μmol/L DAPT treatment. B, enumeration of cell numbers after the
indicated drug exposures shows that DAPT-gefitinib treatment significantly decreased growth compared with no or single-drug treatment. MDA-MB-231
cells harbor Ras pathway mutations and are resistant to dual treatment. C, quantification of BrdUrd-positive cells reveals decreased proliferation as a
contributor to reduced numbers after dual treatment. All experiments were performed in triplicate, and at least 100 cells were counted for each replicate.
*, P < 0.0001, Fisher's exact test. A dose of 3 μmol/L gefitinib was used in all experiments. Columns, mean; bars, SE.

Dong et al.

5468 Cancer Res; 70(13) July 1, 2010 Cancer Research

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/cancerres/article-pdf/70/13/5465/2637337/5465.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
with an antibody specific for cleaved caspase-3, we detected
evidence of caspase cleavage only in MDA-MB-468 cells treated
with dual-pathway inhibition, but not in HCC1806 or
HCC1937 cells (data not shown), despite evidence of apoptosis
as determined by TUNEL and Annexin V staining in these

cell lines. This result suggests that blocking the Notch-EGFR
pathways provokes cell death through multiple mechanisms,
a finding that will warrant further investigation. More importantly,
decreased proliferation and loss of viability were also
observed when cells were treated with a different highly specific
GSI, compound E, as well as another EGFR inhibitor, erlotinib,
ruling out the specific chemistries of DAPT and
gefitinib as causal (data not shown). Thus, simultaneous inhibition
of Notch and EGFR uncovers a synthetic lethal relationship
between these two pathways in BLBC cells.

γ-Secretase activity is required for sustained AKT
activation in the presence of EGFR inhibition
Notch activity has been shown to inhibit apoptosis
through several pathways (38–44), although in breast cancer
phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase (PI3K)–AKT signaling is the
best-characterized mechanism of Notch-dependent resistance
to cell death (19, 20). Because AKT activity has been
found to play a central role in mediating resistance to EGFR
inhibitors in several contexts (28, 45, 46), we determined
whether survival after dual-pathway inhibition involved loss
of AKT signaling by assessing levels of phospho-AKT following
single or combination drug treatment. Although dysregulation
of either Notch or EGFR signaling alone had only
minor effects on AKT activation, simultaneous pathway
blockade dramatically reduced AKT phosphorylation in
HCC1806 and MDA-MB-468 cells (Fig. 3). MAPK kinase signaling
was not affected by single- or dual-pathway treatment
(Supplementary Fig. S4) unlike that which is observed in lung
cancer (25). Therefore, in BLBC cells, concerted EGFR and
Notch signals are required to sustain the AKT activation,
and loss of viability after combined inhibition is likely due
to this requirement.

The γ-secretase holoenzyme is not essential for breast
cancer cell proliferation and survival
The γ-secretase complex consists of presenilin/nicastrin/
APH-1/PEN-2 and is essential for murine embryogenesis
(17). The degree of cytotoxicity caused by inhibiting this complex
in breast cancer has recently been disputed due to a

Figure 2. Effects of combined γ-secretase–EGFR inhibition on cell death
of BLBC cells. TUNEL assays on drug-exposed cells performed after
4 d show a dramatic increase in cell death only after combination
treatment. All experiments were performed in triplicate, and at least
100 cells were counted for each replicate. *, P < 0.0001, Fisher's exact
test. Columns, mean; bars, SE.

Figure 3. Effects of combined
γ-secretase–EGFR inhibition on AKT
phosphorylation of BLBC cells. Immunoblot
analysis after 4 d of the indicated drug
exposures reveals significantly decreased
phospho-AKT (p-AKT) in cells sensitive to dual
treatment. MDA-MB-231 cells sustain AKT
activity in the presence of dual-pathway
inhibition.

Dual Notch-EGFR Pathway Inhibition in Basal-Like Breast Cancer

www.aacrjournals.org Cancer Res; 70(13) July 1, 2010 5469

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/cancerres/article-pdf/70/13/5465/2637337/5465.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
careful analysis of the more specific GSIs such as those used
herein, which failed to show toxicity in breast cancer cells
(24). To rule out the possibility that off-target effects of GSIs
contributed to the synthetic lethal effects that we observed
after dual-pathway inhibition, we generated a stable cell line
lacking γ-secretase activity by knocking down nicastrin, an
essential component of the holoenzyme (47). We used two
short hairpins, each targeting a distinct region of the nicastrin
coding sequence, to lentivirally infect HCC1806 cells.
Control cells were generated by lentiviral transduction of a
short hairpin targeting the luciferase gene, which contains
coding sequences not present in the human genome. Stable,
polyclonal knockdown cell populations were established after
infection and drug selection. Cells harboring the nicastrin
short hairpins showed a significant decrease of nicastrin protein
levels and Notch cleavage, approximating that produced
by pharmacologic γ-secretase inhibition (Fig. 4A). These cells
were expanded for further analysis. As assessed by staining
for BrdUrd incorporation, these cells contained equal S-phase
fractions compared with control cells (Fig. 4B), and no loss of
viability was observed after trypan blue staining (data not
shown). Therefore, the intact γ-secretase holoenzyme is not
required for the survival or proliferation of BLBC cells.
Having established that nicastrin-dependent γ-secretase
activity is not essential in BLBC cells, we next asked whether
nicastrin knockdown cells would exhibit a similar proliferative
and survival defect after exposure to gefitinib as that observed
on pharmacologic inhibition of the enzyme with GSIs. Control
or nicastrin knockdown cells were exposed to gefitinib for
4 days, after which time S-phase entry was measured by
BrdUrd incorporation. Similar to dual drug treatment, the
addition of gefitinib to nicastrin knockdown cells caused a
significant growth arrest, whereas cells harboring the control
short hairpin proliferated normally (Fig. 4B). We then determined
whether cells lacking nicastrin would undergo apoptosis
as observed with acute dual pharmacologic treatment. By
counting TUNEL-positive cells 4 days after gefitinib treatment,
we found that cells engineered to lack nicastrin undergo high
levels of cell death only on EGFR inhibition (Fig. 4C). Therefore,
pharmacologic and RNA interference (RNAi)–mediated
inhibition of γ-secretase activity causes a similar loss of both
proliferative capacity and viability after EGFR inhibition.

A Notch1-AKT pathway can suppress synthetic lethality
after combined pathway inhibition
Notch1 has been shown to be specifically hyperactivated in
BLBC (12). Therefore, to further elucidate the role of Notch1
in the synthetic lethality induced by combined GSI-EGFR inhibition,
we investigated the contribution of the cleaved form
of Notch1 to this phenotype. Transduction of a retroviral vector
carrying the NICD1 cDNA (cleaved, active form of Notch1,
described in ref. 48) into HCC1806 cells was followed by drug
selection with puromycin to establish stable HCC1806-
NICD1–overexpressing cells. Control cells were established
by transduction of an empty vector into HCC1806 cells. Immunoblot
analysis confirmed an increase in a truncated
Notch1 protein in cells infected with NICD1 containing vector
(Fig. 5A). Cells were then exposed to GSI and gefitinib or

DMSO, and the ability of NICD1 to suppress cell death after
dual inhibition was measured by TUNEL. Strikingly, NICD1
expression dramatically inhibited apoptosis after drug treatment
(Fig. 5B). Additionally, this NICD1-dependent resistance
was associated with sustained AKT phosphorylation
even in the presence of dual-pathway inhibition (Fig. 5A).
To further assess the role of AKT in the observed loss of viability
incurred after combined Notch-EGFR pathway inhibition,
we expressed a constitutively active, myristoylated form
of AKT (myr-AKT) through retroviral transduction into

Figure 4. Role of nicastrin in BLBC cells. A, immunoblot analysis shows
the reduction in nicastrin protein levels after short hairpin–mediated
knockdown using two hairpins targeting distinct regions of the coding
sequence. The corresponding decrease in Notch1 cleavage is shown
using the cleavage-specific Val1744 antibody in nicastrin knockdown
cells. Assessment of BrdUrd-positive (B) and TUNEL-positive (C) cells
shows that decreased proliferation and increased cell death in nicastrin
knockdown cells compared with the control luciferase vector are only
observed after gefitinib exposure. Enumeration was performed after 4 d
of drug treatment. All experiments were performed in triplicate, and at
least 100 cells were counted for each replicate. *, P < 0.0001, Fisher's
exact test. Columns, mean; bars, SE.

Dong et al.

5470 Cancer Res; 70(13) July 1, 2010 Cancer Research

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/cancerres/article-pdf/70/13/5465/2637337/5465.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
HCC1806 cells and exposed these and control, empty vector–
containing cells to combined drug treatment (Fig. 5A). Cells
harboring myr-AKT were also resistant to combined pathway
inhibition (Fig. 5B). Therefore, these data indicate that
a Notch1-AKT pathway imparts resistance to combined
γ-secretase–EGFR inhibition in BLBC cells.

Dual-pathway blockade causes dramatic growth
inhibition of BLBCs in vivo
To further investigate the potential efficacy of combining
Notch and EGFR pathway inhibition, we performed a preclinical
therapeutic drug trial in vivo. HCC1806 cells were xenografted
into nude mice and allowed to grow to 50 mm3
, at

which time mice were treated with the gefitinib and/or compound
E, whose in vivo pharmacodynamics have been well
characterized (32). In accord with the in vitro data, Notch
or EGFR inhibition had only a modest effect on tumor
growth. In contrast and also in agreement with the in vitro
data, dual-pathway inhibition had a profound affect on tumor
growth (Fig. 6). Collectively, the results of our in vitro and vivo
experiments indicate that combining Notch and EGFR pathway
inhibition is a rational treatment strategy for BLBC.

Discussion

EGFR inhibition has been regarded as an ineffective therapeutic
strategy in breast cancer and only modestly so in
others. Consequently, identifying mechanisms of resistance
is an area of active investigation. The limited understanding
of resistance in BLBC motivated us to ask whether additional
prosurvival pathways could be identified that contribute to
the poor efficacy of EGFR inhibition in this cancer subtype.

Figure 5. Loss of NICD1-dependent AKT activity is required for synthetic
lethality after combined γ-secretase–EGFR inhibition. A, retroviral
constructs carrying either NICD1 (the active cytoplasmic tail of Notch1) or
constitutively active myr-AKT are sufficient to restore AKT activity after
combined drug treatment when stably expressed in HCC1806 cells.
An empty vector was used as a negative control and fails to rescue the
loss of phospho-AKT after combined inhibition. B, expression of NICD1
or myr-AKT can inhibit cell death after combined drug treatment.
All experiments were performed in triplicate, and at least 100 cells were
counted for each replicate. *, P < 0.0001, Fisher's exact test. Columns,
mean; bars, SE.

Figure 6. Therapeutic efficacy of dual-pathway inhibition in vivo. A, mice
(10 per group) injected with HCC1806 cells were treated with DMSO or
gefitinib (150 mg/kg) 5 d a week by oral gavage and/or compound
E (3 mg/kg) i.p. 5 d a week once tumors reached 50 mm3
. Graphs show
tumor volumes over a 21-d treatment period. ANOVA was used to
calculate significance. B, photographs of representative mice treated with
the respective drugs. Arrow points to a tiny tumor in a mouse treated
with compound E and gefitinib.

Dual Notch-EGFR Pathway Inhibition in Basal-Like Breast Cancer

www.aacrjournals.org Cancer Res; 70(13) July 1, 2010 5471

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/cancerres/article-pdf/70/13/5465/2637337/5465.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
The Notch pathway, which can promote cell survival, is often
activated in BLBC. As such, we chose to test its role as a
resistance factor and have identified a synthetic lethal relationship
between the EGFR and Notch pathways. Whereas
inhibition of either pathway alone failed to cause cell
death, dual blockade induced a dramatic decrease in proliferation
and massive apoptosis. These data provide a new
perspective on the role of EGFR in BLBC. They indicate
that the EGFR pathway is not simply dispensable for these
tumors but rather signaling through the Notch pathway
compensates for the loss of EGFR activity and becomes
a requirement for cell proliferation and survival in the absence
of EGFR-dependent signals. Therefore, Notch signaling
is a potential cause of resistance to EGFR inhibition
in BLBC.
The mechanism(s) of resistance to EGFR inhibition remains
poorly understood in basal-like breast tumors despite
significant advances in other tumor types. In colon
cancer, mutations in Ras, which lies downstream of EGFR
signaling, have recently been shown to be a major cause of
resistance to EGFR inhibitors (36). In agreement with these
data, MDA-MB-231 cells, which harbor Ras mutations (37),
were resistant to EGFR inhibition (as has been previously
reported in ref. 49) and remained so even when treated
with GSIs. However, in breast cancer, Ras mutations are
relatively uncommon and other mutations lying further
downstream of the EGFR receptor have not been reported
that would explain resistance to EGFR inhibition. In Her2/
neu-amplified breast cancers, the mechanism of resistance
to EGFR inhibitors has been shown to be due to Her2/neudependent
activation of AKT (28). BLBCs express little or
no Her2/neu, and therefore, this is an unlikely paradigm
for understanding resistance in these tumors. For all of
these reasons, we hypothesized that compensatory signaling
originating outside of the EGFR pathway must exist to
impart resistance in this subtype and reasoned that the
Notch pathway was one possible source. Its activity is increased
in BLBC and has been tied to the PI3K-AKT pathway
in other contexts (39).
AKT is a recognized mediator of resistance to EGFR inhibition
(28, 45, 46). On treatment with GSIs alone, we did
not observe significant reductions in the levels of phosphoAKT.
However, we did observe significant decreases after
combined pathway inhibition, indicating that the Notch
pathway does contribute to AKT activity in BLBC. Cell
death after combined pathway inhibition was almost completely
eliminated by expression of a constitutively active
form of AKT, showing that decreased AKT activity was responsible
for the loss of viability observed on combined
drug treatment. In acute lymphocytic leukemia, Notch controls
AKT activity through its ability to suppress PTEN expression
(50). However, Notch does not regulate PTEN
levels in breast cancer cells (20), and our data agree with
this conclusion. MDA-MB-468 cells, which do not express
PTEN, still lose AKT activity after combined treatment, implying
that Notch maintains a PTEN-PI3K–independent
mechanism for activating AKT in BLBC cells. It is interesting
to note that we only observed a significant decrease in

this activity after combined pathway inhibition. In contrast,
it has been reported that treatment with GSIs is sufficient
to reduce AKT activation in ER-positive breast
cancer cells (20). This discrepancy may be explained by
an established feature of Notch signaling and its cell type
or context dependency (51). The different effects observed
on γ-secretase inhibition between ER-positive and BLBC
cells is consistent with this feature, particularly when considering
the fact that the various breast cancer subtypes
are thought to arise from distinct cellular origins within
the mammary gland (52). Nevertheless, these data show
a role for Notch signaling in sustaining AKT activity and
cell survival after EGFR inhibition, thereby contributing to
the EGFR resistance observed in BLBC cells.
Experiments examining the effects of γ-secretase inhibition
on cell proliferation or cell survival in basal-like and
other breast cancer subtypes have yielded conflicting results.
Initially, GSIs were thought to possess cytotoxic
and antiproliferative activity in breast cancer (21, 34).
However, recently, the contribution of γ-secretase inhibition
to the cytotoxic potential of commonly used inhibitors
such as GSI I (z-Leu-Leu-Nle-CHO), which can inhibit the
proteasome, has been disputed. More specific inhibitors
devoid of antiproteasomal activity were shown to lack cellular
toxicity, suggesting that some nonspecific inhibitors
kill cells through their ability to inhibit the proteasome
rather than their ability to block γ-secretase activity (24).
We treated BLBC cells with two highly specific GSIs and
did not observe cytotoxic activity after treatment. However,
we chose to finally resolve this issue by asking whether the
intact γ-secretase complex is essential for the proliferation
and survival of BLBC cells by using RNAi to ablate an essential
component of the enzyme, nicastrin (47). By eliminating
the problems caused by chemical differences
intrinsic to the inhibitors, we showed that γ-secretase is
not essential for the proliferation and survival of these
cells. Furthermore, nicastrin knockdown cells, like their
γ-secretase–treated counterparts, were sensitized to EGFR
inhibition, supporting the conclusion that we have identified
a mechanism of resistance to pharmacologic inhibitors
of this pathway. Moreover, specific pharmacologic γ-secretase
inhibition phenocopies ablation of an essential component of
the γ-secretase enzyme. This ability to selectively and simultaneously
inhibit the enzyme is crucial for therapeutic targeting
of the Notch pathway. Breast cancers frequently express
more than one Notch receptor, and the relative contributions
of each receptor to cell growth and survival remain to be fully
elucidated (34, 53). In the case of BLBC, Notch1 seems to be
an important receptor and its activity can be effectively inhibited
pharmacologically.
Our data have important preclinical and clinical implications.
They suggest an approach for the development of
targeted therapeutics based on the need to consider the
existence of compensatory pathways and their roles in cell
survival after a given pathway stress. Here, we have
identified the Notch pathway as one compensatory
mechanism leading to resistance to EGFR inhibition in
BLBC. Notably, Notch functions as a transcriptional

Dong et al.

5472 Cancer Res; 70(13) July 1, 2010 Cancer Research

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/cancerres/article-pdf/70/13/5465/2637337/5465.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
activator, and therefore, its contribution to resistance to
EGFR inhibition should require activation of downstream
targets, the identification of which will provide additional
insights and potential strategies to overcome resistance.
It is also probable that Notch-independent mechanisms
of resistance to EGFR inhibition exist. Most importantly,
clinical-grade inhibitors of the EGFR and Notch pathways
are available, rendering dual-pathway inhibition a viable
clinical strategy that can be tested in the near term
for BLBCs.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

