Poly(ADP-Ribose) Polymerase
Inhibition as a Model for Synthetic
Lethality in Developing Radiation Oncology Targets

Anthony J. Chalmers, MD, PhD, FRCR,* Mina Lakshman, PhD,† Norman Chan, BSc,†
and Robert G. Bristow, MD, PhD, FRCPC†

DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) induced during clinical radiotherapy are potent inducers of
cell death. Poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP)-1 is a 113-kD nuclear protein that binds to
both single- and double-strand DNA breaks and is actively involved in DNA single-strand break
repair and base excision repair. Recently, potent and specific chemical inhibitors of PARP
activity have been developed that are effective tumor cell radiosensitizers in vitro and in vivo.
Because of synthetic lethality, PARP inhibitors may be highly effective as a single agent in
patients whose tumors have germline or somatic defects in DNA damage and repair genes (eg,
ATM, BRCA1, BRCA2, and NBS1) or defects in genes involved in phosphatase and tensin
homolog gene (PTEN) signaling. Defects in specific DNA repair pathways also appear to
enhance the radiosensitizing effects of PARP inhibition. In addition to inherent genetics, tumor
cells may also be preferentially sensitized to radiotherapy by diverse mechanisms, including
proliferation-dependent radiosensitization, targeting of the endothelium and tumor vasculature,
and increased sensitivity to PARP inhibitors within repair-deficient hypoxic cells. Because
biologically active doses of PARP inhibitors caused minimal toxicity in phase I to II clinical trials,
careful scheduling of these agents in combination with radiotherapy may maintain the therapeutic
ratio and increase tumor radiocurability.
Semin Radiat Oncol 20:274-281 Crown Copyright © 2010 Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights
reserved.

Proteins with poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) activity
have been studied for decades and are known to play important
roles in a variety of cellular functions.1 This research
heritage has revealed the existence of a number of different
PARP enzymes with diverse but partly overlapping functions.2
Equally valuably, it has allowed the development of a range of

potent and specific chemical inhibitors that have been well characterized
in cellular and preclinical models.3 The observation
that biologically active doses of PARP inhibitors cause minimal
toxicity in animal models has contributed to the enthusiasm
with which therapeutic roles for these compounds have been
sought. PARP-1 and its close relative PARP-2 are known to play
a role in the cellular response to DNA damage, and a potential
role for PARP inhibitors as sensitizers to cytotoxic
DNA damaging agents has emerged.4 The revelation in
2005 that PARP inhibitors have potent, single-agent activity
against tumor cells deficient in the DNA repair proteins
BRCA1 or BRCA2 confirmed that “synthetic lethality” is a
genuine and highly valuable therapeutic approach.5,6 Furthermore,
it supported the idea that the DNA repair defects
that are a cardinal feature of carcinogenesis can provide
tumor-specific therapeutic possibilities. This review
addresses the radiosensitizing properties of PARP inhibitors,
describing the mechanisms responsible and the potential
clinical applications. It focuses particularly on
whether radiosensitization is likely to be tumor specific
and, if so, which tumors are likely to benefit.

*Genome Damage and Stability Centre, University of Sussex, Brighton,
United Kingdom.
†Departments of Radiation Oncology and Medical Biophysics, University of
Toronto and Ontario Cancer Institute/Princess Margaret Hospital, University
Health Network, Toronto, Ontario, Canada.
Supported by operating grants from the Medical Research Council to AJC
and the Terry Fox Research Institute, the Ontario Institute for Cancer
Research, and an infrastructure grant from the Canadian Foundation for
Innovation grant to the STTARR Innovation Facility to RGB. ML is a
CIHR-EIRR21t Post-Doctoral Fellow, and RGB is a Canadian Cancer
Society Research scientist.
Address reprint requests to Anthony J. Chalmers, MD, PhD, FRCR, Brighton
and Sussex Medical School and Genome Damage and Stability Centre,
University of Sussex, Falmer BN1 9RQ, UK. E-mail: a.j.chalmers@
sussex.ac.uk

274 1053-4296/10/$-see front matter Crown Copyright © 2010 Published by Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
doi:10.1016/j.semradonc.2010.06.001
Biological Functions of PARP
The PARP family of proteins is defined by the catalytic capacity
to modify target proteins by the covalent addition of
chains of poly(ADP-ribose) polymers. Of the PARP family,
PARP-1 is by far the most abundant, accounting for at least
80% of cellular PARP activity. PARP-1 and its closest relative
PARP-2 possess DNA-binding domains, and their catalytic
function is activated when they bind to sites of DNA damage.
By this mechanism, they play an important role in detecting
the presence of damaged DNA and activating signaling pathways
that promote appropriate cellular responses.7
PARP-1 is a 113-kD nuclear protein with 4 major functional
domains: an N-terminal DNA-binding domain that
mediates binding to breaks or nicks in DNA; a nuclear localization
signal domain; a central domain that facilitates binding
of PARP-1 to itself and is also a target for poly(ADPribosylation);
and a C-terminal catalytic domain that binds
NAD and uses it to modify target proteins by the addition
of long, branching chains of poly(ADP-ribose) (pADPr).
PARP-1 is relatively abundant in the nucleus. In response to
DNA damage, it binds rapidly to DNA breaks, a process that
activates its catalytic function leading to the modification of
histones and proteins involved in single-strand break (SSB)
repair, double-strand break (DSB) repair, and DNA replication.
Such modifications are transient because pADPr polymers
are rapidly degraded by the action of poly(ADP-ribose)
glycohydrolase (Fig 1).1
DSBs in DNA, if unrepaired, are potent inducers of cell
death. In mammalian cells, DSBs may be repaired by 2 different
pathways.8 Most radiation-induced DSBs are repaired
by nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ). This process is rapid
and may occur at any stage of the cell cycle, but because it
lacks the capacity to restore any DNA that is lost during the
breakage event or subsequent processing, it is error prone.
Homologous recombination repair (HR) uses the sister chromatid
as a template and faithfully restores DNA sequence,
but as a result can only take place in cells that have 2 copies
of the relevant region of DNA. Therefore, HR operates only
during the S and G2 phases of the cell cycle and indeed plays
a particular role in resolving DSB that arise during DNA
replication.

PARP-1 binds to both single- and double-strand DNA breaks.
Although its role in SSB repair is well established, the functional
relevance of its DSB-binding activity remains uncertain. With respect
to SSB repair, binding of PARP-1 to SSBs that are induced
either directly or as intermediate products of base excision repair
(BER) appears to protect the damaged site from inappropriate recombination
events. PARP-1 also enhances the recruitment and
activation ofmultiple components ofthe BER repair complex,most
notably the scaffold protein XRCC1, by both direct interaction and
poly(ADP-ribosylation).9 PARP-1–deficient (or inhibited) cells
show reduced rates of BER10 and hypersensitivity to agents that
induceSSB.11Because repair ofSSBsis delayed but not abolished by
PARP inhibition and SSBs are not thought to be associated directly
with cell death, additional mechanisms by which PARPi promote
cytotoxicity after radiation have been investigated.

Mechanisms
Underlying Radiosensitizing
Effects of PARP Inhibitors:
Dependence on DNA Replication

Ionizing radiation used in the clinical treatment of cancer
generates SSBs and DSBs in an approximate ratio of 25:1. As
described previously, the major effect of PARP inhibition is to
delay, but not abolish, the repair of SSBs. Because DSBs are
the most important cytotoxic lesions, the effect on SSB repair
has a minimal impact on the survival of nonreplicating cells.
In contrast, PARP inhibition does increase radiosensitivity of
rapidly proliferating cells, and the magnitude of the radiosensitizing
effect in cell culture systems has been shown to correlate
with the proportion of cells that are replicating.12,13
PARP inhibition increases the level of unrepaired DSB in
replicating cells by at least 2 mechanisms. (1) The delayed
repair of radiation-induced SSB increases the probability of
unrepaired lesions colliding with the DNA replication machinery,
generating excess DSBs. (2) The inhibition of the
catalytic activity of PARP does not impede binding to DNA
breaks but prevents PARP from modifying itself by the addition
of pADPr. Unmodified PARP remains bound to sites of
DNA damage so PARP inhibitors also interfere with downstream
repair processes, increasing the toxicity of DSB that
are generated in their presence.14
The fact that PARP inhibitors increase radiosensitivity only
in replicating cells is of great interest to radiation oncologists.
In general terms, tumors contain a higher proportion of replicating
cells than normal tissues, and the cell-cycle checkpoint
responses of these cells are often defective.15 Furthermore,
some of the critical normal tissues that limit radiation
doses in the clinic (eg, the brain and spinal cord) are composed
almost entirely of nonreplicating G0 or G1 phase cells.
Thus, PARP inhibitors have the potential to increase the therapeutic
index of radiation therapy in a variety of tumor sites
by increasing damage in highly replicating tumor cells, but
sparing noncycling normal tissues, which are often responsible
for dose-limiting late damage after radiotherapy. This
theory has been substantiated by in vitro and in vivo studies
showing that PARP inhibitors enhance radiosensitivity by
Figure 1 A schematic diagram of the PARP-1 protein showing the
key functional domains. The vast majority of PARP inhibitors compete
with NAD at the “PARP signature” site in the catalytic domain.

PARP inhibitors and radiotherapy 275
factors ranging from 1.3 to more than 2.13,16-18 In vitro and in
vivo fractionation of the radiation regimen was seen to preserve
or even enhance the radiosensitizing effect of the PARP
inhibitor. A summary of radiosensitization data pertaining to
new generation PARP inhibitors that are being tested in phase
I to III trials is shown in Tables 1 and 2.

PARP Inhibition and
HR: Synthetic Lethality

Under normal conditions, PARP proteins do not contribute
directly to DSB repair,19 but defects in HR can be augmented
by PARP inhibition to cause cell death. In the absence of
exogenous DNA damage, the continuous exposure of replicating
cells to a PARP inhibitor causes a significant increase in HR activity

that is thought to represent the repair of DNA replication forks that
have stalled or collapsed after encountering unrepaired SSB.20
PARP inhibitors probably play a dual role in this process by (1)
reducing the rate of repair of endogenously arising single-stranded
lesions and (2) obstructing the efficient resolution of stalled or collapsed
replication forks by impedingthe release of PARP molecules
from damaged sites. The absolute requirement of HR for repair of
these lesions is shown bythe extreme sensitivityto PARP inhibitors
of HR-defective cells, such as breast or ovarian cancer cellsthat lack
the crucial HR proteins BRCA1 or BRCA2.5,6
Targeting cells with a specific DNA repair defect by inhibiting
a second DNA repair pathway is an example of “synthetic
lethality,” and the promising data derived from cellular
systems has been rapidly translated into effective treatments
for patients with hereditary BRCA1 and BRCA2 deficient canTable
1 Selected New-Generation PARP Inhibitors in Clinical Trials and Sensitivity to RT In Vitro

Treatment Model Assays Conclusions

GPI-15427: 7 mol/L, 15 min
before radiation: 2 Gy; 24, 48,
72, 96 h (Khan et al, 2009)

JHU012 head and neck
cancer cells
Neutral comet assay,
apoptosis (annexin
V/PI)

Compared with RT alone, GPI15427
RT decreased
DNA DSB repair and
increased apoptosis
KU-0059436 (AZD2281, Olaparib):
1 mol/L 1 h before
3 or 24 h
after radiation: 0-5 Gy (Dungey
et al, 2009)

Human glioblastoma cell
lines: T98G and U87-
MG

Clongenic survival,

-H2AX foci
KU-0059346
RT reduced
clonogenic survival
compared with RT alone
Decreased DNA repair; DNA
replication-dependent
Fractionation sensitive
ABT 888: 2.5 mol/L; radiation: 5
Gy (Liu et al, 2008)
Human lung cancer cells
H1299, prostate cancer
cell lines DU145 and
22RV1

Clonogenic survival,
repair foci assay
Combination ABT888
RT
reduced clonogenic survival
compared with RT alone
Effect in both oxic and acutely
hypoxic cells
ABT888: 5 mol/L as neoadjuvant;
radiation: 0-6 Gy (Albert et al,
2007)

H460 lung carcinoma cells Clonogenic survival,
apoptosis (annexin
V/PI), endothelial
damage assay

Decreased clonogen survival
with ABT888
RT
compared with RT alone
Increased apoptosis
Inhibition of endothelial tubule
formation
E7016: 3-5 mol/L treated 6 h
before radiation: 0-8 Gy
(Russo et al, 2007)

Human U251 glioblastoma
cells, MiaPaCa
pancreatic cancer cells,
DU145 prostate cancer
cells

Clonogenic survival,

-H2AX foci, mitotic
catastrophe,
apoptosis
(annexin V)

Increased clonogen kill
Increased mitotic catastrophe
No change in apoptosis

AG14361: 0.4 M adjuvant to
radiation: 8 Gy (Calabrese et al,
2004)

Human colon carcinoma
cells: LoVo and SW620
Clonogenic survival Combined with RT, PARPi
decreased survival by
inhibiting recovery from
potentially lethal damage
KU-0059456 (AZD2281, Olaparib):
500 nmol/L 1 h before IR and
left on for 22 h post-radiation:
0-8 Gy (Loser et al, 2010)

Human and murine
primary cells defective
in Artemis, ATM, DNA
ligase IV

Clonogenic survival,
alkaline comet
assays, -H2AX
foci

Sensitization to KU-0059346 RT
was enhanced in cells
defective for ATM, Artemis
and DNA ligase IV (SER
increased from 1.3
to 1.6)Overall,
clonogenic survival
after KU-0059456
RT was
decreased in rapidly
dividing and DNA repairdeficient
cells
SER, sensitizer enhancement ratio.

276 A.J. Chalmers et al
cers.21 Another biomarker that may select for PARP inhibitor
synthetic lethality is the status of the phosphatase and tensin
homolog gene (PTEN) that is located on chromosome 10 and
is frequently deleted in human cancer. Preclinical studies
have suggested that PTEN loss is associated with PARP inhibitor
sensitivity in vitro and in vivo although the mechanism
by which this occurs is controversial.22,23 Furthermore, in
prostate cancer, we have documented functional defects in
the HR and NHEJ DNA repair pathways24 along with allelic
losses in PARP-1, p53, and ATM25 and methylation of BRCA1
and BRCA2 that may also affect PARP inhibitor sensitivity.26
In addition to the obvious benefits for this subset of patients,
the accumulating clinical evidence supports earlier predictions
that the short-term use of PARP inhibitors would be
extremely well tolerated, even in patients who have undergone
multiple previous cytotoxic therapies.
Fromthetherapeutic perspective,the simultaneousinhibition of
PARP and HR should give rise to marked radiosensitization of replicating
cells but would also carry a risk ofinducing syntheticlethality
in nonirradiated but proliferating tissues. To date, no specific
inhibitor of HR has been developed. However, the heat shock protein
90 inhibitor 17-(allylamino)-17-demethoxygeldanamycin selectively
accumulates in tumor cells and inhibits HR by downregulating
Rad51 and BRCA2. Consistent with this hypothesis, 17-
(allylamino)-17-demethoxygeldanamycin and the PARP inhibitor
olaparib synergisticallyincreasedthe radiosensitivity ofproliferating
glioma cell populations without affecting nonreplicating cells.27

Effects of PARP
Inhibition on Cells Defective in
NHEJ, BER, or ATM-p53 Signaling

Many researchers have sought a direct role for PARP-1 in DSB
repair. In cells that are deficient in core components of NHEJ
(such as Ku70/80 and DNA ligase IV), an alternative (or

Table 2 Selected New-Generation PARP Inhibitors in Clinical Trials and Sensitivity to RT In Vivo

Treatment Model Assays Conclusions

GPI-15427: 10, 30, 100, 300 mg/
kg orally
Neoadjuvant (1 h before)
Radiation: 2 Gy for 2 d (Khan et
al, 2009)

JHU012 and JHU006 head
and neck cancer
xenografts

Tumor growth delay
apoptosis
(TUNEL)

GPI - 15427
RT inhibits tumor
regrowth when compared with
RT alone; increased apoptosis

ABT888: 7.5 mg/kg twice a day,
p.o.
Monday-Saturday 1 h before TMZ
TMZ: 33 mg/kg/d
Monday to Friday for 2 wk
radiation: 2 Gy
Monday to Friday for 2 wk (total
20 Gy for 11 d) (Clarke et al,
2009)

Intracranial xenograft
model of glioblastoma
using (MGMThypermethylatedglioblastoma
models:
GBM12 and GBM22)

Animal survival
body weight
Combination therapy of ABT888
and TMZ
RT increased
animal survival compared with
RT alone; minimal weight loss

ABT888: 25 mg/kg/d via osmotic
pumps 2 d before RT radiation:
2 Gy/d for 10 consecutive days
(Donawho et al, 2007)

Human colon carcinoma
HCT116 xenograft
Animal survival ABT888
RT increased mean
survival time from 23 to 36 d
compared with RT alone

ABT888: 25 mg/kg ip for 5
consecutive days, 1 h before
RT radiation: 2 Gy/d for 5
consecutive days (Albert et al,
2007)

Human Lung carcinoma
H460 xenograft
Tumor growth delay
Ki-67 staining
Apoptosis (TUNEL)
CD34 staining for
blood vessel
density

ABT 888 delayed tumor regrowth
by 6.5 d compared with
radiation alone
Associated with decreased
tumor vasculature, decreased
proliferation and increased
apoptosis
No increased toxicity with
combination treatment
AG14361: 5 or 15 mg/kg/d ip
daily for 5 d, 30 min before
radiation: 2 Gy locally to the
tumor daily for 5 d (Calabrese
et al, 2004)

Subcutaneous implants of
human colon carcinoma,
SW620

Tumor growth delay Combination AG14361
RT
delayed tumor regrowth (from
19 to 37 d) when compared
with RT alone
Increased toxicity for
combination treatment
E7016: 30 mg/kg oral
TMZ: 3 mg/kg oral radiation:
4 Gy single dose (Russo et al,
2009)

Human U251 glioblastoma
xenograft
Tumor growth delay TMZ
E7016
RT delayed
tumor regrowth compared with
RT alone

ip, intra-peritoneal.

PARP inhibitors and radiotherapy 277
“backup”) end-joining pathway exists that partly compensates
for the NHEJ defect,28 and the inhibition of PARP activity
suppresses this pathway.29 It has been proposed that the
absence of key NHEJ components allows PARP-1 to bind and
activate alternative end joining; this process is obstructed by
PARP inhibition. Cells that are deficient in core NHEJ and
therefore highly radiosensitive can be further sensitized by
treatment with a PARP inhibitor, and the degree of sensitization
is greater than in wild type cells (Fig 2).30 Many cancers
exhibit some degree of impairment of DNA repair,31,32 but it
is uncommon for tumors to be profoundly deficient in one or
more of the core NHEJ proteins. However, the fact that PARP
inhibitors increase radiosensitivity of nonreplicating cells
only if they are deficient in NHEJ predicts that many normal
tissues will be relatively unaffected by such agents. Figure 3
depicts a simplified overview of interactions between PARP
inhibition and DNA repair pathways.
Because PARP-1 has an established role in the BER pathway,
it might be expected that PARP inhibitors would have
little effect on the radiosensitivity of cells deficient in other
BER proteins. This does not appear to be the case. In collaboration
with Conchita Vens, we have shown that the radiosensitivity
of cells deficient in XRCC1 or another BER protein
DNA polymerase  is increased by PARP inhibition to an
equal or greater degree than parental controls (Fig 2). Because
defects in BER have been reported in a range of human
tumors and appear to be relatively common,33,34 the treatment
of these patients with PARP inhibitors may have merit.
Many tumors exhibit defective cell-cycle checkpoints, and
mutations in checkpoint signaling proteins, such as p53,
ATM, NBS1, MRE11, and BRCA1, are associated with a predisposition
to cancer.16 In the absence of exogenous DNA
damage, PARP inhibitors promote the activation of ATM,
probably in response to collapsed replication forks.35 Because
ATM is required to stimulate the pathways that repair this
damage, ATM-deficient cancer cells, such as mantle cell lymphomas,
are sensitive to PARP inhibition.36 Furthermore,
ionizing radiation causes a G2/M checkpoint response that is
stimulated by ATM. Because radiation-induced accumulation
of cells in G2 phase is enhanced in the presence of PARP
inhibitors, the downregulation of ATM or its downstream
signaling proteins might exacerbate the radiosensitizing effects
of these PARP inhibitors.30,37
Taken together, these observations indicate that the genetic
or functional status of DNA repair in human cancers
should be characterized before considering the use of PARP
inhibitors as single-agent or radiosensitizing therapies. A
number of functional assays have been proposed;38 one approach
is to quantify DNA repair foci in situ in tumor tissues
and in surrogate normal tissues, such as lymphocytes or skin
fibroblasts.21,39,40

PARP Inhibition In Vivo; Effects on
Blood Vasculature and Hypoxia

Preclinical efficacy of PARP inhibitors has now been observed
in murine tumor models with DNA repair defects involving
mismatch repair, BRCA-1, and ATM deficiency. Chemosensitization
of p53-deficient breast cancer has also been documented.36,41-44
These models have not yet been used to test
for radiosensitization by PARP inhibition. However, several
combination studies of PARP inhibition and experimental

Figure 2 Sensitizer enhancement ratios (standard error of the
mean or standard deviation where indicated) for the PARP inhibitor
olaparib derived from clonogenic survival assays in a range of DNA
repair proficient and deficient cell lines. In repair proficient cells (2
different parental mouse embryo fibroblast (MEF) cell lines and
Chinese hamster ovary (CHO) EM9 cells with XRCC1 expression
restored by stable transfection with the HX plasmid), enhancement
ratios of 1.3 to 1.4 were observed. In ligase IV, ATM, and Artemisdeficient
MEFs, enhancement ratios for olaparib were significantly
higher (SER  c.1.6). XRCC1-deficient (EM9) and proficient (EM9-
HX) CHO cells were sensitized to the same extent (SER  c.1.3),
whereas DNA polymerase – defective MEFs were sensitized to a
greater degree than the parental controls (SER  1.9 vs 1.4), indicating
that the radiosensitizing effects of PARP inhibition are maintained
or enhanced in cells with defective BER. (Reprinted with
permisiion.31)

Figure 3 A simplified diagram showing the major pathways that
contribute to the repair of radiation-induced DNA damage and their
relationship to cell-cycle phase. The key mechanisms of action of
PARP inhibitors are indicated. IR is a potent inducer of SSB that are
predominantly repaired by BER, which functions throughout the
cell cycle. PARP inhibitors delay BER, increasing the burden of
unrepaired SSB, and promote replication-dependent conversion of
SSB to DSB during S-phase. DSB arising in this manner are repaired
by the homologous recombination repair pathway. Radiation also
induces DSB directly. These are repaired mainly by NHEJ, which
functions during G1 and G2 phases of the cell cycle. In the absence
of core NHEJ, an alternative end joining process can repair radiation
induced DSB. This pathway is impeded by PARP inhibition.

278 A.J. Chalmers et al
radiotherapy have been performed in human xenografts, and
the promising results of these preclinical studies are summarized
in Table 1. AG14361 enhanced tumor growth delay in
a colorectal cancer xenograft model, GPI-15427 caused sustained
tumor control in head and neck cancer xenografts,
ABT-888 has shown radiosensitization in colorectal and lung
cancer models, and E7016 (in combination with temozolomide)
significantly improved tumor growth delay in glioblastoma
xenografts.18,19,45-48
In many of these in vivo models, the sensitizing effect of
the inhibitor was greater than might be predicted by the more
modest effects observed in cell lines. In some cases, this
might be attributable to superior effects with fractionated
radiation schedules, but in some studies only large single
doses were used. None of these studies used ex vivo clonogenic
assays or measured the dose required to control 50% of
tumors so they were unable to show direct sensitization of
tumor clonogens or whether this was achieved in cycling
versus noncycling tumor cells. This is an important issue
because mechanistic studies using solely the growth delay
assay could be biased by effects of radiotherapy and novel
drugs on the tumor vasculature. Indeed, it is possible that
some PARP inhibitors could induce short-term, vasodilatory
effects by virtue of their structural similarities to nicotinamide.
This could enhance tumor growth delay after radiotherapy
by increasing tumor blood flow, enhancing drug
penetration, and increasing oxygen concentrations to offset
hypoxic cell radioresistance. Vasoactive properties and/or antiendothelial
effects have been documented for AG14361
and ABT888,45,46,49 as outlined in Tables 1 and 2, and PARP
inhibition appears to be prolonged in tumors compared with
normal tissues. This pharmacokinetic property might favor
an enhanced in vivo response in tumor cells during radiotherapy
and further improve the therapeutic ratio.
All solid tumors contain hypoxic cells. Hypoxia generates
aggressive tumor cell phenotypes in part because of ongoing
genetic instability and a “mutator” phenotype. The latter may
be caused by the suppression of Rad51, BRCA1, BRCA2, and
other HR protein expression via decreased transcription or
translation.50-53 We have shown that these hypoxia-mediated
HR repair defects can be specifically targeted by DNA-damaging
agents and/or “contextual synthetic lethality” to kill
repair-deficient cells and preserve the therapeutic ratio. Specifically,
HR defects render hypoxic cells more sensitive to
ionizing radiation (IR), mitomycin C, and cisplatin.52 More
recent data suggest that HR-deficient hypoxic cells that have
adapted and are proliferating are also more sensitive to PARP
inhibition.5,6
Finally, to explore the possibility that effects of PARP inhibition
could be altered by differential NAD and ATP metabolism
in hypoxic tumor cells, we tested the role of ABT888
as a radiosensitizer under hypoxic conditions in human prostate
(DU-145 and 22RV1) and non–small-cell lung (H1299)
cancer cell lines.54 These studies showed that when ABT-888
was combined with IR, clonogenic radiation survival was
decreased by 40% to 50% under oxic or hypoxic conditions.
This sensitization of hypoxic cancer cells further supports the

clinical use of PARP inhibitors to improve the therapeutic
ratio achieved by radiotherapy.
In summary, the contributing mechanism(s) in vivo remain
largely unaddressed and may be model specific (see
summary in Fig 4). At present, careful studies in human
xenografts to directly determine the therapeutic ratio in vivo
by comparing tumor efficacy with normal tissue toxicity in
combined PARP inhibitor plus radiotherapy studies have not
been conducted.26,55 As such, it is not possible to conclude from
the preclinical data that PARP inhibition always enhances the
therapeutic ratio in combination with radiotherapy.

Clinical Trials of PARP
Inhibitors Plus Radiation

Despite the encouraging preclinical studies, very few clinical
studies of PARP inhibitors in combination with radiation are
underway. In general, it is the late, irreversible effects of
radiation that limit total radiotherapy dose, and these effects
are not observed until months or years after treatment. Conventional
drug dose-escalation studies combined with radical
radiotherapy regimens are therefore difficult to design, and
current studies have instead focused on combining PARP
inhibition with palliative radiotherapy. At the time of writing,
only 2 ongoing studies were identified. Both involve the Abbott
compound ABT-888, and both are targeting brain tumors.
The first is a phase I study combining escalating doses
of oral ABT-888 with whole-brain radiation therapy (37.5 Gy
in 15 fractions or 30 Gy in 10 fractions) in patients with
cerebral metastases. The second is a phase I/II study of the
same drug in combination with radical radiation therapy
with concomitant and adjuvant temozolomide in the firstline
treatment of patients with glioblastoma multiforme. The
phase I component seeks to establish the maximum tolerated
dose of the PARP inhibitor in this setting, and the subsequent
phase II study will estimate the efficacy of this combination.
Because PARP inhibition sensitizes glioma cells to both radiation
and temozolomide, this is an ambitious study that has
the potential to significantly improve outcomes for this difficult
patient group. However, the risks of hematologic and

Figure 4 Mechanisms by which PARP inhibitors may increase clinical
radiocurability (see text for details).

PARP inhibitors and radiotherapy 279
neurologic toxicity are also high, and the determination of
the therapeutic ratio of the treatment will be important.

Conclusions and
Outstanding Questions

In this review, we have discussed a variety of mechanisms
that may underlay the radiosensitizing effects of PARP inhibitors
in vitro and in vivo. Provocative data suggest that these
sensitizing effects are likely to be more pronounced in tumors
than in normal tissues during fractionated treatments, but
careful preclinical and clinical studies are needed to prove
that the therapeutic ratio is enhanced. A number of questions
are still outstanding with respect to the use of this combination:
(1) Are all PARP inhibitors equally efficacious in terms
of maintaining the therapeutic ratio? (2) How should PARP
inhibitors and fractionated radiotherapy be scheduled? (3)
What are the best predictors for sensitization to PARP inhibition:
proliferation rates, genetic status of tumor cells (ATM,
BRCA1/2, or PTEN deficiency), and/or hypoxic fraction? (4)
Do PARP inhibitors alter normal tissue genetic instability,
and could they increase secondary malignancies when used
in combination with radical radiotherapy? Even with these
remaining questions, early data are supportive of a unique
role for PARP inhibitors to augment tumor radiocurability,
and the results of defined palliative and radical radiotherapy
combination trials are eagerly awaited.

