REVIEW ARTICLE

Synthetic lethal interactions for the development of cancer
therapeutics: biological and methodological advancements

Shinji Mizuarai • Hidehito Kotani

Received: 15 September 2010 / Accepted: 12 October 2010 / Published online: 26 October 2010
Springer-Verlag 2010

Abstract Synthetic lethal interaction is defined as a
combination of two mutations that is lethal when present in
the same cell; each individual mutation is non-lethal.
Synthetic lethal interactions attract attention in cancer
research fields since the discovery of synthetic lethal genes
with either oncogenes or tumor suppressor genes (TSGs)
provides novel cancer therapeutic targets. Due to the
selective lethal effect on cancer cells harboring specific
genetic alterations, it is expected that targeting synthetic
lethal genes would provide wider therapeutic windows
compared with cytotoxic chemotherapeutics. Here, we
review the current status of the application of synthetic
lethal screening in cancer research fields from biological
and methodological viewpoints. Very recent studies seeking
to identify synthetic lethal genes with K-RAS and p53,
which are known to be the most frequently occurring
oncogenes and TSGs, respectively, are introduced. Among
the accumulating amount of research on synthetic lethal
interactions, the synthetic lethality between BRCA1/2 and
PARP1 inhibition has been clinically proven. Thus, both
preclinical and clinical data showing a preferential antitumor
effect on BRCA1/2 deficient tumors by a PARP1
inhibitor are the best examples of the synthetic lethal
approach of cancer therapeutics. Finally, methodological
progress regarding synthetic lethal screening, including

barcode shRNA screening and in vivo synthetic lethal
screening, is described. Given the fact that an increasing
number of synthetic lethal genes for major cancerous genes
have been validated in preclinical studies, this intriguing
approach awaits clinical verification of preferential benefits
for cancer patients with specific genetic alterations as a
clear predictive factor for tumor response.

Introduction

Identification of therapeutic targets is one of the most
imperative steps in cancer drug development. The emerging
molecular cancer therapeutics, in addition to the classical
cytotoxics, reiterate the importance of target
identification approach as the primary upstream process of
cancer drug development. Targets of molecular cancer
therapeutics can be categorized into three classes. The first
example of a cancer target class that has achieved successful
outcomes is the one harboring genetic alterations,
such as mutations or translocations. Clinical data have
recently shown that epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) inhibitors provided benefits for non-small cell lung
cancer (NSCLC) patients with an EGFR mutation, whereas
a poor response was observed for patients with the wildtype
EGFR gene (Maemondo et al. 2010; Mok et al. 2009).
Despite the relatively recent clinical development of
B-RAF inhibitors, targeting the mutated B-RAF gene by
PLX-4032 resulted in a significant improvement in the
overall response rate in melanoma patients (Smalley 2010).
In in vitro enzyme kinase inhibition assays, PLX-4032 and
its derivatives preferentially inhibited mutant B-RAF
compared with the wild-type B-RAF, which could explain
the promising results in the phase I trial of the B-RAF
inhibitor (Tsai et al. 2008). One of the most successful

S. Mizuarai
H. Kotani (&)
Department of Oncology, Tsukuba Research Institute,
Banyu Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., 3 Okubo, Tsukuba,
Ibaraki 300-2611, Japan
e-mail: hidehito_kotani@merck.com

H. Kotani
President’s Office and Business Development,
Banyu Pharmaceutical Co., Ltd., Kitanomaru Square,
1-13-12 Kudan-kita, Chiyoda-Ku, Tokyo 102-8667, Japan

123

Hum Genet (2010) 128:567–575
DOI 10.1007/s00439-010-0900-x
targets for molecular cancer therapeutics is imatinib for
CML patients with a BCR-Abl translocation. After
impressive data were reported that showed a drastically
improved outcome in chronic myelogenous leukemia
(CML) patients (Druker et al. 2001), imatinib was first
approved for CML in 2001. This established a clinical
proof of concept that cancer can be treated by targeting
genetic defects that clearly differ from normal cells.
Another target with a genetic alteration in clinical samples
is the ALK inhibitor for NSLC with the EML4-ALK
translocation. The EML4-ALK fusion oncogene has been
reported to occur in about 4% of NSCLC (Janku et al.
2010). A phase II trial with an ALK inhibitor, PF02341066,
showed a remarkable response rate (OR 57%) in
NSCLC patients harboring the EML4-ALK translocation
(Bang et al. 2010). PF-02341066 is now being examined in
phase III trials, which are comparing the inhibitor with a
standard of care in second line treatment.
Although targeting the driver mutations in cancers is a
straightforward approach, mutated genes are often not
druggable; the gene products are not amenable to pharmacological
intervention by small molecule compounds.
Thus, a pathway focused approach is the second class of
target identification that many researchers have pursued.
K-RAS is the most frequently mutated oncogene known to
date; however, it is relatively difficult to pharmacologically
inhibit the activity of K-RAS compared with other classes
of proteins, such as kinases, GPCRs or ion channels
(Saxena et al. 2008). Examples include RAS farnesyl
protein transferase inhibitors which showed little activity in
tumors that frequently contain Ras mutation (Morgillo and
Lee 2006). Therefore, MEK and B-RAF, which are
downstream effectors of the RAS signaling pathway, have
been targeted in a pathway focused approach, although the
targets themselves were not mutated in the cell lines
examined. The inhibitors showed a preferential anti-tumor
effect on K-RAS pathway deregulated cells in preclinical
research (Solit et al. 2006; Garon et al. 2010). mTOR is
targeted to suppress the phosphoinositide 3-kinase (PI3K)
pathway, and its allosteric inhibitors have been clinically
approved (Shor et al. 2009). Although patient stratification
was not conducted for the prescription of mTOR inhibitors,
preclinical data indicated that tumors with an activated
PI3K pathway show a higher response compared with
inactivated ones (Neshat et al. 2001; Shi et al. 2002). In
addition, PI3K pathways are known to be deregulated at
high prevalence in the indications of drugs that include
renal cell carcinoma (RCC) (Cho et al. 2007).
Recent years have witnessed a number of research studies
focusing on synthetic lethal screening as the third class for
cancer target identification (Mizuarai et al. 2008; Ferrari
et al. 2010). With synthetic lethal interaction, either single
mutation is compatible with viability, but the combinational

disruption of these two non-essential genes leads to lethality.
Targets with synthetic lethal interactions are expected to
possess several advantages. In principle, targeting of synthetic
lethal interactions would provide wider therapeutic
windows. Since a cancer-related mutation of interest sensitizes
tumor cells to the drug that inhibits its synthetic lethal
partner, normal cells without the cancer-related mutation are
not affected by the drug. In addition, this method can be
applied to the mutation of tumor suppressor genes (TSGs)
that cannot be addressed by other two approaches (BommiReddy
et al. 2008). Since mutations of TSGs account for
more than 80% of cancer-related mutations, various synthetic
lethal targets have been explored for TSGs.
Application of synthetic lethal genes has a large variety
of possibilities, especially for the target identification of
molecular therapeutics for cancers with non-druggable
mutated genes, including p53, K-RAS and breast cancer
gene 1/2 (BRCA1/2). In parallel with the recognition of
synthetic lethal genes in the cancer field, great progress in
methodology has been made for the establishment of highthroughput
screening of synthetic lethal interactions.

Synthetic lethal genes with K-RAS

Several recent studies have independently identified synthetic
lethal genes with K-RAS oncogenic mutations
(Fig. 1). Barbie et al. (2009) have identified TANK-binding
kinase 1 (TBK1) as a synthetic lethal gene with mutant
K-RAS by RNA interference (RNAi) screening in a cell
panel composed of wild-type and mutant K-RAS cells. The
selective anti-cell growth effect was confirmed by another
set of cell lines, demonstrating the generality of TBK1 as a
synthetic lethal gene with mutant K-RAS. TBK1 is a noncanonical
IkB that is known to regulate the NFkB pathway.
To provide insight into the mechanism underlying the
synthetic lethality of TBK1 and K-RAS, expression profiling
by microarray analysis was performed for cancer cell
lines and clinical samples. They found that both K-RAS
and NFkB pathways were activated in mutant K-RAS cells
when examined by pathway signatures, which consisted of
two individual gene sets to measure the extent of K-RAS
and NFkB deregulation, respectively.
Luo et al. (2009) performed a genome-wide RNAi assay
to find genes whose inhibition selectively reduces cell
viability in mutant K-RAS cells. The identified genes
included cyclin A2 (CCNA2), KIF2C, PLK1, and anaphase-promoting
complex/cyclosome (APC/C), suggesting
that mutant K-RAS cells are vulnerable to mitotic perturbations.
Microarray analysis of clinical lung adenocarcinoma
showed an inverse correlation between the mitotic
machinery genes with patient survival in a K-RAS statusdependent
manner.

568 Hum Genet (2010) 128:567–575

123
Another research study, conducted by Scholl et al.
(2009), also showed that mutant KRAS has a synthetic
interaction with STK33 ablation in a large-scale RNAi
screening containing kinase, phosphatase, and cancerrelated
genes. Interestingly, the selective anti-tumor effect
of STK33-silencing on KRAS mutant cells was shown to
be irrespective of tissue type through extensive studies with
cell lines derived from AML, multiple myeloma, breast,
colon pancreatic, and lung cancers. Although the synthetic
lethal effect of STK33-silencing was mediated by modulating
p70 ribosomal S6 kinase 1 dephosphorylation followed
by BCL2-associated agonist of cell death (BAD)
inactivation, it remains elusive why STK33 showed synthetic
lethality with the K-RAS mutation. Therefore,
understanding the molecular mechanism of the synthetic
lethal interaction and elucidating the molecular function of
STK33 are necessary.
Puyol et al. (2010) found an unexpected synthetic lethal
interaction between mutant K-RAS and CDK4 ablation in a
mouse NSCLC model. Among the three interphase cyclindependent
kinases (CDKs: CDK2, CDK4, and CDK6)
examined, only genetic disruption of CDK4 prevented the
development of mutant K-RAS-induced NSCLC development
in vivo. The approach was unique in that synthetic

interaction was demonstrated with a transgenic mouse
cancer model that recapitulates human NSCLC. This study
suggested that CDK4 selective inhibitors should be
examined in NSCLC patients with mutant K-RAS.
Since the discovery of an oncogenic mutation in the
K-RAS gene in 1982 (Tabin et al. 1982), a large number of
basic research articles that indicated the importance of
K-RAS in tumorigenesis have been published. Until now,
however, no anti-tumor drug targeted for K-RAS mutated
cancers has been approved, although wild-type K-RAS is
used as a predictor of non-response to EGFR targeted
therapy (Van Cutsem et al. 2009). In order to develop novel
therapeutics effective for K-RAS mutant cancer cells, it
would be valuable to perform head-to-head comparisons of
the selective anti-tumor effects on K-RAS mutated cancers
among the candidate targets identified in the previous
studies (Table 1) in the same experimental platform.

Synthetic lethal genes with p53

P53 is a tumor suppressor gene that is activated in response
to various types of DNA damage, including chemotherapeutics,
radiation, and oxidative stresses. The activation
leads to the up-regulation of p53 regulatory genes, leading
to arrest of the cell cycle at the G1 stage, and repair of the
damaged DNA, which is known as G1 cell cycle checkpoint
(Dasika et al. 1999). When the damage is detrimental,
p53 transactivates additional genes involved in apoptosis to
prevent the accumulation of the severe DNA damage.
Among a variety of TSGs, p53 is the most frequently
mutated one in multiple types of cancers. For instance, 33,
43, and 38% of mutations are found in pancreatic, colorectal
and lung cancer, respectively. Therefore, the identification
of cancer therapeutic targets with synthetic
lethality with p53 deregulation attracts great attention since
they are expected to exert selective lethal effects only in
p53 mutant tumor cells, without causing side effects in
normal wild-type somatic cells.
When DNA is damaged, both G1 and G2/M cell cycle
checkpoints are activated to prevent the accumulation of
DNA damage. Wee1 is a tyrosine kinase involved in the
G2/M cell cycle checkpoint (Rowley et al. 1992). Wee1
kinase activated by DNA damage prevents cell cycle progression
at the G2/M phase by inactivating phosphorylation
of cyclin-dependent kinase1 (CDK1) (Lundgren et al.
1991). In p53 wild-type cells, DNA damage is repaired by
both G1 and G2/M cell cycle checkpoints, whereas only the
G2/M checkpoint mediated by Wee1 sustains cell cycle
integrity in mutant p53 cells. In accordance with the pivotal
role of Wee1 in the G2/M checkpoint, the inhibition of
Wee1 was found to exert a preferential anti-tumor effect on
p53-negative cells in the presence of DNA damage (Wang

K-RAS K-RAS

STK33 TBK1 CDK4 Mitotic
regulators

Signal transduction effectors Cell cycle regulators

CHK1 ATM Wee1

G2 checkpoint abrogators Rho pathway

GEF-H1

Synthetic interactions with the most frequently mutated oncogene

Synthetic interactions with the most frequently mutated TSG

In the presence of DNA damage

Unknown NFkB S phase M phase Related
function

SGK2 PAK3

TP53 TP53

Fig. 1 Synthetic lethal interactions with the most frequently mutated
oncogene or TSG. The upper panel shows the synthetic lethal
interactions with the K-RAS oncogene. SKT33, TBK1, CDK4 and
mitotic regulators, such as APC/C, were shown to be synthetically
lethal with K-RAS in both in vitro and in vivo studies. STK33 and
TBK1 are categorized into signal transduction notes, whereas CDK4
and mitotic regulators are cell cycle effectors. The lower panel shows
the synthetic lethal interactions with p53-deficiency. CHK1, ATM
and Wee1 were shown to be synthetically lethal with p53-deficiency
in the presence of DNA damage, whereas GEF-H1, SGK2 and PAK3
showed the synthetic lethal interaction without DNA damage

Hum Genet (2010) 128:567–575 569

123
et al. 2004). The synthetic lethality with the p53 gene was
also observed for the inhibition of other G2/M checkpointrelated
genes, such as CHEK1 and ATM (Wang et al.
2004; Jiang et al. 2009), which leads to the establishment
of a field of G2/M checkpoint abrogators as mutant p53-
targeted therapies. In addition, MK2-silencing was shown
to exhibit synthetic lethality with p53-deficiency in the
presence of DNA damage (Reinhardt et al. 2007). MK2-
depletion dramatically decreased the phosphorylation level
of Cdc25A/B, providing initial evidence that MK2 plays an
important role in cell cycle checkpoints. We also confirmed
the synthetic lethal effect of Wee1 inhibition with mutant
p53 by a selective small molecule inhibitor in the presence
of DNA damaging agents (Hirai et al. 2009; Mizuarai et al.
2009). The context specificity of anti-tumor effects of
Wee1 inhibition depending on p53 status was examined in
detail with an isogenic pair of ovarian cancer cell lines
(wild-type and mutant p53 TOV21G), followed by additional
cells with either wild-type or mutant p53 genes. The
effect was closely correlated with the indices of G2/M cell
cycle abrogation that can be measured by phosphorylatedCDK1,
phosphorylated-histone H3, and mRNA induction
of Wee1 signature genes. With the accumulating evidence
showing synthetic lethal interaction of p53 mutation with
G2 checkpoint abrogators, development of Wee1 inhibitors
holds promise for p53 mutant-targeted therapy in combination
with DNA damaging agents.
Multiple studies have found that a missense mutation of
the p53 gene provides gain-of-function for the mutated
form of p53, in addition to well-recognized loss-of-function
of p53 to transactivate mRNAs of genes related to
apoptosis or cell cycle arrest (Frazier et al. 1998; Brosh and
Rotter 2009). In p53 mutated cancers, numerous genes
were reported to be up-regulated, promoting tumorigenesis.
As one of the gain-of-function properties of p53 mutation,
we and other groups have reported that the Rho pathway is
more highly activated in mutant p53 cancer cells compared
with wild-type p53 cells (Guo and Zheng 2004; Mizuarai
et al. 2006). Expression of different types of mutant p53
was shown to induce mRNA expression of guanine
exchange factor H1 (GEF-H1) for RhoA in cancer cells,
implying that the Rho pathway that facilitates evasion or
proliferation processes of tumor progression is relatively
up-regulated by p53 mutation (Mizuarai et al. 2006). These
data suggested that the gain-of-function of mutant p53
could be an Achilles’ heel for cancer cells harboring its
genetic alteration and thereby offers an alternative
approach for p53 targeted therapy.
Additionally, an RNAi screen with a small set of 86
kinases also identified that SGK2 and PAK3 are selectively
effective for the growth suppression of p53-deficient cells
(Baldwin et al. 2010). The synthetic lethality was illusTable
1
trated in a pair of human foreskin keratinocytes with or

Summary of the identification and validation of K-RAS synthetic lethal genes

Validation method TBK1 STK33 Mitotic regulators CDK4
Isogenic cell lines Immortalized lung epithelial
cells: mutant K-RAS versus
control

NA DLD1: WT K-RAS versus
mutant K-RAS

NA

Cancer cell panel Primary screen: 19 cancer cell
lines, secondary screen: 11
NSCLC cells

25 cancer cell lines and two
untransformed cell type

14 NSCLC cell lines 10 human NSCLC cell
lines

Confirmation in vivo Xenograft tumors: two WT
K-RAS versus two mutant
K-RAS

Xenograft tumors: four WT
K-RAS versus three mutant
K-RAS

Xenograft tumors: DLD1 (WT)
versus HCT116 (mutant)

A transgenic NSCLC
mouse model: with
and without inducible
mutant K-RAS

Correlation in clinical samples Positive correlation between
RAS signature and NFkB
signatures

NA Expression of COPS3, CDC16
and EVI5 showed correlation
with prognosis

NA

Tissue type Lung Irrespective of tissue origin Lung adenocarcinoma,
colorectal cancer

NSCLC

570 Hum Genet (2010) 128:567–575

123
without the HPV E6 protein that is known to inactivate
p53. PAK3 interacts with the Rho family proteins,
including CDC42 and RAC (Manser et al. 1995), and
PAK3 is known to modulate actin filament that is also
regulated in the downstream pathway of Rho family proteins
(Kumar et al. 2006). Baldwin et al. (2010) also used
the primary cells where p53 had been depleted by RNAi to
confirm the synthetic lethal interaction between p53-deficiency
and either SGK2 or PAK3. It would be interesting to
further decipher the molecular mechanism of the synthetic
lethal interaction with p53 deficiency.

Synthetic lethal genes with BRCA1/2

Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1 (PARP-1) is a DNA
repair enzyme that triggers the DNA damage signaling
pathway by binding to DNA strand breaks. PARP1 cleaves
NAD? to produce ADP-ribose, which is followed by the
addition of ADP polymers onto various proteins, including
histones and other DNA repair enzymes (Peralta-Leal et al.
2008). The ADP ribosylated proteins at the site of DNA
breaks enable the unwinding of the DNA helix and expose
the matrix for the recruitment of proteins involved in DNA
repair. PARP-1 inhibitor has gained attention, since it was
the initial anti-tumor agent that was used to establish proof
of concept of synthetic lethality in a clinical trial. Several
years ago, two pioneering studies established the preclinical
proof of concept of the selective anti-tumor effect of a
PARP1 inhibitor on cancer cell lines devoid of BRCA1/2
(Bryant et al. 2005; Farmer et al. 2005). In xenograft tumor
models, pharmacological intervention of PARP1 by AG14361
or KU0058684 resulted in profound tumor regression in
BRCA1/2 deficient cell lines compared with wild-type or
heterozygous cancer cells while sparing normal rodent
cells. The preclinical studies also demonstrated the
molecular mechanism of synthetic lethal interaction of
PARP-1 inhibition with the BRCA1/2 mutation. Pharmacological
intervention of PARP-1 inhibits the baseexchange-repair
(BER) process, leading to the accumulation
of single strand breaks (SSBs). This accumulation eventually
results in the formation of detrimental double strand
breaks (DSBs), which cannot be repaired in BRCA1/2
deficient cells. Given the prominent preclinical evidence of
the efficacy of the PARP1 inhibitor for BRCA1/2 mutant
cancer cells, clinical studies have been immediately adapted
to target cancer patients who harbor these mutations.
Preliminary results of a phase I clinical trial of a PARP1
inhibitor, olaparib, was reported with patients with a wide
range of solid tumors, including BRCA1/2 deficient
patients. Olaparib was well tolerated and showed singleagent
anti-tumor efficacy only to BRCA1/2 mutation carriers
(Fong et al. 2009). According to data obtained with

the pharmacodynamic biomarker, which examined poly
(ADP-ribose) (PAR) formation and cH2X in peripheralblood
mononuclear cells and plucked eyebrow-hair follicles,
respectively, more than 90% of PARP inhibition was
observed at tolerable doses. To further evaluate anti-tumor
efficacy selective to subpopulations, phase II trials were
conducted in patients of both chemotherapy-refractory
breast and ovarian cancer patients harboring BRCA1/2
mutations. Olaparib showed striking clinical efficacy; the
objective response rate (ORR) was 41 and 33%, respectively,
as determined by RECIST criteria as an initial
successful example of synthetic lethal interaction in clinical
cancer research (Audeh et al. 2010; Tutt et al. 2010).
Multiple ongoing phase I and II studies might further
strengthen the clinical evidence of synthetic interactions
between PARP1 suppression and BRCA1/2 deregulation.
In addition, other defects in repair genes that exhibited
synthetic lethal interaction with PARP inhibition in preclinical
research could increase the number of responder
patients (Lo¨ser et al. 2010; Weston et al. 2010).

Methodological advancement in synthetic lethal
screening for cancer target identification

Cancer models used for synthetic lethal screens

In order to identify and validate synthetic lethal genes in
the field of cancer research, cancer cell lines were used in
three ways. First, isogenic cell lines have been most
frequently used for synthetic lethal screening (Torrance
et al. 2001; Bommi-Reddy et al. 2008). Since the paired
cell lines differ only in the status of oncogene or tumor
suppressor gene, it is quite useful to examine the effect of
this genetic status on the knockdown of potential synthetic
partners. Isogenic cell lines for research on most of
the cancer-related genetic alterations are now available,
including cell lines with alterations in the cell cycle, such
as p53 (Bartz et al. 2006), RB1 (Eguchi et al. 2007) and
CDKI (Geller et al. 2004) and ones with alterations in
signaling transduction, such as PTEN (Lee et al. 2004),
K-RAS (Barbie et al. 2009) and b-catenin (Kim et al.
2002). In an interesting study using isogenic cell lines, a
pair of two isogenic cell lines with differing K-RAS
statuses was marked by a distinct mutant of GFP that
enables double-label reading (Torrance et al. 2001). The
fluorescent labeling in each of the isogenic cell lines
presented advantages: co-culturing of the two cell lines
that creates an even growth environment and multiple
time-point assessment in phenotypic assays. It is also
worth noting that primary cells and their matched cells
that were engineered to have a single oncogenic lesion
have been successfully used to discover synthetic lethal

Hum Genet (2010) 128:567–575 571

123
interactions (Baldwin et al. 2010). The second approach
leverages a cell panel that harbors naturally occurring
genetic alterations (Scholl et al. 2009). Since cell lines in
the panel possess additional genetic alterations, as well as
the mutation of interest, it would be important to use a
larger number of cell lines to compare the approach with
isogenic cell lines in order to exclude the possibility that
observed differences in phenotype between the two
groups are derived from genetic backgrounds other than
genetic alterations under the examination of synthetic
lethal interactions. In addition, the observation of synthetic
lethal interactions in a cell panel assay generates
more robust data compared with studies using only isogenic
cell lines. Thus, candidates of synthetic lethal genes
identified in large-scale RNAi screens with isogenic cell
lines are often validated in cell panel assays. Conventionally,
synthetic lethal genes are initially identified in in
vitro studies with cultured cells and then examined in in
vivo model animals, such as the rodent xenograft tumor
model, for validation. However, some studies have
attempted initially to identify the synthetic lethal interactions
in vivo, which is the third method of synthetic
lethal screening. Michiue et al. (2009) showed that
simultaneous gene-silencing of both EGFR and AKT2 by
siRNA synergized to induce apoptosis specifically in
glioblastoma cells in vivo. In general, it is difficult to
achieve sufficient gene-silencing by siRNA in vivo.
However, efficient siRNA delivery for the gene-silencing
of both genes was achieved by fusing the dsRNA binding
domain with a TAT peptide transduction domain (PTD)
delivery peptide. The fact that the PTD-mediated delivery
into cells is utilized in multiple clinical trials with peptide
and protein cargos also supports the idea that this technology
could enhance the development of a research field
of in vivo synthetic lethal assays by allowing simultaneous
targeting of multiple cancer-related genes. Several
other methods have also successfully delivered siRNA in
vivo, which include lipid formation, polymer mediated
delivery, and antibody fusion proteins. An alternative
approach to examine in vivo synthetic lethality is to
leverage genetically modified mouse models, as exemplified
by mutant K-RAS and the CDK disruption mouse
models (Puyol et al. 2010). Gene disruption of CDK4
prevented tumor progression in mice with oncogenic KRAS.
Various types of double knockout mice have been
generated in other therapeutic fields that lead to the
maturation of compound transgenic mice generation
technology (Sainsbury 2002). Since synthetic lethal
interaction screening examines growth inhibitory effects,
conditional knockout or inducible gene expression systems
that enable the site- and time-specific regulation of
gene expression are essential for the application of double
knockout mice technology.

Barcode shRNA pooled library for high-throughput
synthetic lethal screens

Most of the synthetic lethal interactions in mammalian
cells have been identified through large-scale screening
with RNAi ranging from 500 to 20,000 covered genes
(Berns et al. 2004; Siva et al. 2005; Schlabach et al. 2008).
Whereas siRNA is used to perform high-throughput
screening that enables knockdown for individual genes in
single-well assays, shRNA screening allows researchers to
investigate long-term knockdown effects on cancer-related
phenotypes, such as viability, apoptosis, and cell cycle, in a
pooled shRNA assay in which a single dish of cells is
infected in culture with a large number of shRNA viral
vectors. For example, in order to identify synthetic lethal
targets, both isogenic cell lines are infected with the pooled
shRNAs by the viral vectors. After cells were cultured in a
selection medium, genomic DNA integrated with shRNA
by retroviral or lentiviral infection is recovered and subjected
to PCR amplification followed by DNA microarray
analysis to determine the shRNA sequence. Comparing the
relative abundance of individual shRNAs from the two
isogenic cell lines using DNA microarray analysis enables
the identification of novel synthetic lethal genes. In the
process of PCR amplification of the integrated viral
sequences in order to decode pooled shRNA, two methods
have been employed to analyze the pool shRNA sequences.
One employs a direct method by utilizing probe sequences
complementary to shRNAs. However, since shRNAs are
generally 21 nucleotides in length, self-annealing poses a
problem during the process of recovery of shRNA from
genomic DNA. To solve the annealing issue, the other
method utilizes individual unique barcode sequences,
which are an integral part of the shRNA cassette (Fig. 2).
Since sequences of the 60 nucleotides barcode are different
among shRNAs in a library, the barcode sequence enables
the measurement of the abundance of each shRNA in a
pool screen by subsequent shRNA microarray analysis
(Silva et al. 2005). Alternatively, the current advancement
of deep sequencing was also used for the analysis of
quantification of pooled shRNA (Bassik et al. 2009). As
compared with microarray analysis, this technique generates
more accurate data for the analysis of barcode
sequences.

Future direction

Since an increasing number of synthetic lethal genes have
been proposed in basic research studies, it is hoped that
synthetic lethal interactions will be demonstrated in clinical
trials as well. For the clinical development of molecular
cancer therapeutics, the identification of predictive

572 Hum Genet (2010) 128:567–575

123
biomarkers that can be used for the stratification of
responder patients is of great significance. Imatinib and
trastuzumab, which are recognized as milestones of
molecular cancer therapeutics, have scored considerable
success with the help of the predictive biomarkers of BCRAbl
translocation and Her2 over-expression, respectively.
The promising candidate of predictive biomarkers for
cancer therapeutic targets identified in synthetic lethal
screens is the partner mutation associated with synthetic
lethality. In general, the measurement of genetic alterations
generates more accurate data compared with other molecular
markers, such as protein over-expression and activation
of proteins or pathways, offering an advantage for
synthetic lethal targets. Furthermore, combination of two
predictive biomarkers might be feasible for synthetic lethal
genes, which predicts responder population more accurately
compared with the cases with a single predictive
biomarker. For example, a candidate predictive biomarker
for CDK inhibitors could be a K-RAS mutation based on
the aforementioned synthetic lethal study (Puyol et al.
2010). We and other groups also reported that deregulation
of RB tumor suppressor pathway, which is composed of
p18INK4C, RB1, and CDK4/6, affects responses to CDK
inhibitors (Eguchi et al. 2009). The combination of K-RAS
mutation and CDK pathway deregulation as predictive
biomarkers could select hyper-responder populations or
tumors. Since each of the two genes that exhibit synthetic

lethality is frequently located in different cancer-related
pathways, both dysfunction of the pathway in which the
target is directly involved and the genetic mutation of the
synthetic lethal partner could contribute to the improvement
of the anti-cancer response rate for synthetic lethal
target inhibitors. The unique characteristic of availability
of the two predictive biomarkers holds great promise for
the success of clinical evaluation of synthetic lethal genes.

