Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=ifon20

Future Oncology

ISSN: (Print) (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/ifon20

Exploration of Synthetic Lethal Interactions as
Cancer Drug Targets

Hendrik J Kuiken & Roderick L Beijersbergen

To cite this article: Hendrik J Kuiken & Roderick L Beijersbergen (2010) Exploration of Synthetic
Lethal Interactions as Cancer Drug Targets, Future Oncology, 6:11, 1789-1802, DOI: 10.2217/
fon.10.131

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.2217/fon.10.131

Published online: 09 Dec 2010.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 294

View related articles
ISSN 1479-6694

part of

Future Oncology

10.2217/FON.10.131 © 2010 Future Medicine Ltd Future Oncol. (2010) 6(11), 1789–1802 1789

The need for cancer-specific
treatment strategies
Tumor development is an evolutionary process
driven by an accumulation of mutations allowing
cells to acquire traits that can ultimately
lead to a cancerous state [1]. As a consequence
cancer is presented as a collection of diseases
with high differential complexity that is not
limited to differences in the location of origin
and the stage of the disease, but extends to the
genetic context and heterogeneity within one
tumor type. Although surgery may be used to
efficiently resect a primary tumor, it cannot clear
the patient of metastatic cancer cells that might
already reside at distant locations. Furthermore,
the location of the primary tumor might not
allow sufficient surgical margins to assure resection
of infiltrating tumor cells in nearby tissue.
Hence, in most instances, localized or systemic
treatment with radiation, conventional cytotoxic
or targeted molecular therapeutics is needed to
prevent both recurrence of the primary tumor
and metastasis.
Even after 70 years of cancer drug discovery,
most of the molecular therapeutics in use
today share the same mode of action: interference
with the DNA replication processes by
causing DNA damage, or interference with cell
division through (de)stabilization of microtubules
[2]. Their effectiveness is based on two
general cancer hallmarks: increased proliferation
and impaired DNA damage checkpoints,

both of which drive cancer cells to a certain
death in the presence of additional damage.
Despite their established effectiveness in a wide
range of cancers, and some remarkable success
stories, such as the use of cisplatin regimens in
testicular cancer and combinations of conventional
regimens in Hodgkin’s lymphoma, these
conventional cytotoxic drugs generally have
low therapeutic indices as they cause many side
effects at the cost of therapeutic efficacy [3,4].
Moreover, differences in sensitivity as well as
intrinsic or acquired resistance to a treatment
can cause patients with similar tumor types to
display diverse response rates. For this reason,
it is of equal importance to identify biomarkers
that can predict the responsiveness to cancer
therapeutics and which can guide personalized
treatment strategies by selecting patients
for specific therapies in order to develop novel
cancer-specific therapeutics [5].
To develop new cancer-specific treatments
with an improved therapeutic index two strategies
can be followed: first, targeting a cancerspecific
molecule or process; or second, targeting
a noncancer-specific molecule or process for
which the cancer cell has acquired a qualitative
or quantitative requirement [6]. A major challenge
in cancer treatment is the presence of
dormant cells within the tumor, which rarely or
never divide during the treatment, and as such
are not killed by conventional molecular therapeutics.
This population of cells can include

Exploration of synthetic lethal
interactions as cancer drug targets

Hendrik J Kuiken1 & Roderick L Beijersbergen†1
1

Division of Molecular Carcinogenesis, The Netherlands Cancer Institute, Plesmanlaan 121, 1066 CX
Amsterdam, The Netherlands
†

Author for correspondence: Tel.: +31 20 512 1960 n Fax: +31 20 512 1954
n r.beijersbergen@nki.nl

In cancer research the quest continues to identify the Achilles’ heel of cancer.
The ideal cancer drug targets are those that are essential in tumor cells but not
in normal cells. Such targets are defined as cancer-specific vulnerabilities or as
synthetic lethal interactions with cancer-specific genetic lesions. The search for
synthetic lethal interactions focuses on proteins that are frequently mutated but
elude pharmacological inhibition, for example, RAS, or proteins that are lost in
cancer cells and by definition cannot be targeted, such as the tumor suppressor
genes p53, APC and RB. These genetic interactions could yield alternative,
effective targets for cancer treatment. However, it remains very difficult to predict
or extrapolate these synthetic lethal interactions based on existing knowledge.
With the discovery of RNAi, unbiased large-scale functional genomic screens for
the identification of such targets have become possible potentially leading to
major advances in the treatment of cancers. In this review we will discuss the
biological basis of synthetic lethal interactions in relation to existing targeted
therapeutics, lessons taught by targeted therapeutics already used in the clinic
and the implementation of RNAi as tool to identify such synthetic lethal interactions.

Keywords

n chemical–genetic n network
addiction n (non)oncogene
addiction n RAS n RNAi
n screen n shRNA n siRNA
n synthetic lethal interaction

For reprint orders, please contact: reprints@futuremedicine.com

Review
1790 Future Oncol. (2010) 6(11) future science group

Review Kuiken & Beijersbergen

cancer stem or initiator cells, which can give rise
to a recurrent tumor or metastasis [7]. Hence,
there is a need for targeted therapies, which are
highly selective for cancer cells, and do not rely
on cell division for their toxicity. Ideally such
therapies should also target and kill dormant
cancer cells.

Targeted cancer therapies
& network addiction
Advances in molecular and cancer biology have
led to rational drug-design strategies, resulting
in the development of so-called targeted
therapeutics [2,8]. Among these are therapeutics
that target driving oncogenes, such as the
successful small-molecule inhibitor, imatinib
mesylate, which targets the BCR–ABL fusion
protein, c-KIT and PDGF receptor in chronic
myelogenous leukemia, gastrointestinal stromal
tumors, and hypereosinophilic syndrome,
respectively [9–11]. Other targeted therapeutics
such as gefitinib, an inhibitor of mutant
or overexpressed EGF receptor (EGFR) in
non-small-cell lung cancers, and the antibody
trastuzumab, which blocks signaling from
overexpressed HER2/neu in breast cancers,
have also shown success in the clinic [12–15].
The mechanism of action for this class of targeted
therapeutics is based on an acquired
dependency on a specific oncogenic signaling
pathway; a concept known as oncogene addiction
[16]. The importance of sustained oncogenic
signaling is also strengthened by the mechanisms
by which tumor cells become resistant
to these targeted therapeutics. In the case of
acquired resistance to imatinib mesylate, these
tumors harbor mutations in the kinase domain
of BCR–ABL, or contain genomic amplification
of the BCR–ABL locus [17]. However, the
mechanisms of resistance do not always imply
the target itself, but can also occur in downstream
components of the signaling network.
In the case of trastuzumab, mutations that
result in the activation of the PI3K effector
pathway, which is downstream of HER2/Neu,
are a major determinant of resistance [18]. With
respect to gefitinib, mutations or amplification
of its target EGFR, but also amplification
of MET confers resistance to gefitinib in
non-small-cell lung cancers. However, MET
is not downstream of HER2/Neu, but confers
resistance to gefitinib by driving HER3-
dependent activation of the PI3K pathway [19].
This, and the observation that introduction of
a constitutive active PI3K mutant is sufficient
to confer resistance to gefitinib, indicates that

these tumors have in fact become addicted to
the activation of a specific molecular network,
which is not mutated itself, but deregulated by
distinct upstream genetic alterations [20–22].
The observations that cancer cells can acquire
a dependency for a genetic alteration led to the
oncogenic shock model [23]. Oncogenic signaling
induces both pro-apoptotic signals as well
as prosurvival signals. Upon inactivation of the
oncogenic signal, the pro-apoptotic signaling
is sustained longer than the prosurvival signal,
thereby inducing apoptosis. An alternative
explanation is based on the hypothesis that (epi)
genetic mutations can occur, which are dependent
on a pre-existing genetic alteration. In
the absence of this alteration, these mutations
would be lethal for the cells. Consequently,
reversion of the genetic alteration results in a
lethal phenotype caused by unmasking a secondary
mutation. Rather than (epi)genetic
events, these secondary events can be an accumulation
of cell intrinsic or extrinsic events
only tolerated in the presence of the genetic
alteration to which the cancer cell is addicted.
The addiction to specific genetic alterations
is not restricted to oncogenes, as reintroduction
of tumor-suppressor genes such as P53,
RB or APC also cause cancer cells to arrest or
undergo apoptosis [16,24] This phenomenon
is named tumor-suppressor hypersensitivity,
illustrated by stabilization of wild-type p53 in
human cancer cells. A large fraction of human
tumors have retained expression of wild-type
p53. However, the p53 pathway is inactivated
due to other alterations, for example, increased
expression of MDM2, a negative regulator of
p53. Inhibition of the MDM2–p53 interaction
by treatment with a MDM2 inhibitor known
as Nutlin-3 results in stabilization of p53 and
induction of apoptosis in cancer cells, but not
in normal cells. The finding that knockdown of
53BP1 can rescue cancer cells from Nutlin-3-
mediated effects suggests that these cancer cells
exhibit intrinsic DNA damage signals, which
are masked by the absence of p53 function,
but which upon restoration of p53 expression
causes activation of the p53 pathway resulting
in apoptosis [25].
The mechanisms by which tumor cells can
become resistant to targeted therapeutics have
increased our understanding of mechanisms of
drug action and the networks to which cancer
cells are addicted. These detailed insights
can guide the development of novel targeted
therapeutics directed to crucial hubs in these
networks. In addition to being more widely
future science group www.futuremedicine.com 1791

Exploration of synthetic lethal interactions as cancer drug targets Review

applicable, such targets might be less prone to
acquired resistance caused by additional mutations
in upstream or downstream signaling molecules.
These hubs might not be oncogenic by
themselves and this form of dependency is often
referred to as non-oncogene addiction [26]. The
concepts of oncogene and non-oncogene addiction
are extensively discussed by Sharma and
Settleman, and Luo et al. [27,28]. Although the
exploration of these concepts has just started,
it is clear that these acquired cancer-specific
dependencies are of great importance for the
development of novel targeted therapeutics.

Molecular buffering
& genetic interactions
As discussed above, the majority of the current
targeted therapeutics are based on the concept of
oncogene addiction. However, many oncogenes
have proven to be difficult targets for smallmolecule
inhibition. For example, activating
mutations in the RAS oncogenes are frequent
in human cancer, but so far targeting RAS
itself has remained a major challenge [29]. An
analogous situation applies to MYC, a transcription
factor that upon mutation or amplification
acts as an oncogene. It is clear that cancer cells
driven by oncogenic RAS or MYC can become
addicted to these oncogenic signaling pathways.
This is clearly illustrated in mouse models
with inducible expression of mutant RAS
or MYC, where inactivation of their expression
in established tumors resulted in tumor regression
[30–32]. Inhibition of non-oncogenic molecules
acting up- or down-stream of these oncogenes
may provide an indirect mean of targeting
these genetic lesions. However, the tumor cells’
acquired dependencies are not restricted to the
linear network downstream of the oncogenic
alteration per se. Different molecular networks
can control or buffer overlapping cellular processes,
and perturbations in one network can
result in an acquired dependency for another.
Such possible interactions are difficult to predict
from existing knowledge, and require unbiased
approaches for their identification. Examples
of these genetic interactions include synthetic
lethal interactions. Two genes have a synthetic
lethal interaction when cells die if they have
both genes mutated but can survive if either
gene alone is mutated [33,34]. The identification
of negative genetic interactions associated with
genetic alterations specific for human cancer
can be exploited directly as drug targets or
provide anchors for further investigation of
cancer-specific vulnerabilities [35,36].

One of the best characterized synthetic lethal
interactions that is presently being investigated
in clinical trials is between breast cancer
(BRCA)1/2 and poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP)1 [37,38]. PARP1 is required for base excision
repair, which is the preferred method of
repairing modified bases in DNA prior to entry
in S-phase. Loss of PARP1 function results in
single-strand breaks, leading to the collapse of
replication forks during S-phase. On the other
hand, BRCA proteins are involved in homologous
recombination repair and can resolve these
single-strand breaks during S-phase by using sister
chromatids as templates. In the absence of
both PARP1 and BRCA1/2, error-prone repair
mechanisms take over, which eventually lead to
an accumulation of DNA damage resulting in cell
death. Recently, a synthetic interaction between
loss of PTEN and PARP was observed [39]. Cells
that have lost expression of PTEN also lost the
expression of RAD51, which like BRCA1/2 is
involved in homologous recombination repair.
The enhanced sensitivity to PARP inhibitors
could be restored by introduction of either
PTEN or RAD51. These are clear examples
of two DNA damage repair networks having a
genetic interaction. The BRCA1/2 interaction
with PARP1 and other examples of synthetic
lethal interactions based on DNA repair and
checkpoint networks, including p53–ATM and
p53–MK2, are reviewed by Rouleau et al. and
Reinhardt et al. [40,41].
Most insights into genetic interactions
have been obtained from the model organism
Saccharomyces cerevisiae, in which a genome-wide
deletion collection has been generated that can
be used with high-throughput screening techniques
[42]. An extensive review on genetic
interactions and large-scale studies in model
organisms is provided by Dixon et al. [43]. To
identify genetic interactions in human cancer
cells, one can take two approaches: an educated
approach based on current knowledge of signaling
pathways and data from model organisms,
or a completely unbiased approach by means
of functional genomic screening approaches
with large gene sets. The first approach is
based upon the assumption that the synthetic
interactions are conserved during evolution.
In addition to S. cerevisiae, large-scale genetic
interaction screens have been performed in
Schizosaccharomyces pombe and Caenorhabditis
elegans, allowing assessment of the conservation
of such networks between different species [43].
Comparative analysis of genetic interaction
networks between S. pombe and S. cerevisiae
1792 Future Oncol. (2010) 6(11) future science group

Review Kuiken & Beijersbergen

show that approximately 30% of the negative
interactions are conserved [44]. However, it was
shown that a very small percentage (~5%) of
the genetic interactions are conserved between
C. elegans and yeast [45,46]. A possible explanation
for the higher conservation between S. cerevisiae
and S. pombe compared with C. elegans is given
by Dixon et al. [43]. Cellular-level redundancy in
multicellular organisms might mask the detection
of certain genetic interactions, which manifest
themselves in a subtle way and require alternative
phenotypic readouts. Yet another plausible
explanation is the lack of selective pressure on
synthetic genetic interactions and as a consequence
low conservation [45,46]. During evolution,
additional redundancies for a certain process
can be acquired resulting in the loss of the
genetic interaction without affecting the genes
that displayed that interaction. One obvious
example is that of gene duplication. Questions
arising from these observations are: how much
rewiring of such genetic interactions can occur
in human cancer, and what are the implications
for acquired resistance to cancer therapies
based on such genetic interactions? With regard
to the search for novel cancer-specific targets,
the low conservation of synthetic genetic interactions
between species directs us to the second
approach, unbiased functional genomic screens
to identify synthetic genetic interactions with
genetic alterations in human cancer.

RNAi as a tool for functional genomics
& identification of synthetic
lethal interactions
Although the phenomenon of RNAi was first
described in plants in 1990, the discovery of this
mechanism in C. elegans stands at the basis of
loss-of-function genomics in higher organisms,
rewarded with the Nobel price in 2006 [47,48].
RNAi is the mechanism whereby introduction
of dsRNA into a cell results in the degradation
of a mRNA product that shares high complementarity
with the dsRNA. Since its discovery,
advances in the generation of tools that mediate
RNAi have resulted in an extensive set of
genome-wide RNAi libraries [49]. These libraries
can be divided into two major classes: synthetic
siRNA and vector-based shRNA libraries
(Figure 1). The siRNA libraries can be subdivided
into those derived from algorithm-driven design
and chemical synthesis, and those which are
enzymatically generated by RNaseIII digestion
of dsRNA fragments of approximately 500 bp
(endoribonuclease-prepared siRNAs). The wide
availability and ease of use of synthetic siRNAs

have led to their extensive application in many
studies [50]. Although knockdown efficiency of
siRNAs is high, the knockdown is transient,
restricting the use of siRNAs to short-term
experiments. In addition, testing siRNAs across
multiple cell lines can be challenging, as it may
require optimization of transfection conditions
for every individual cell line.
The development of vector systems expressing
shRNAs, which are processed in the cell to
siRNAs, have provided a tool for long-term experiments
[51,52]. These libraries can be subdivided by
the vector used (e.g., retroviral or lentiviral) or by
the shRNA design (i.e., a shRNA or the shRNA
embedded in a miRNA structure [shRNAmiR])
[49]. The introduction of the shRNA
constructs through viral infection makes these
libraries more suitable for testing in large panels
of different cell lines. Similar to siRNA libraries,
shRNA libraries can be used for screens in a
single-well format (Figure 1). However, in contrast
to siRNA libraries, shRNA libraries can be used
in a pooled format (Figure 1). In this approach large
numbers of shRNA vectors are combined and
used to infect a single, large population of cells.
After selection, the integrated shRNA cassettes
can be recovered by PCR on genomic DNA and
the relative abundance of each individual shRNA
can be determined by hybridization to DNA
microarrays or deep sequencing [53]. The barcode
technology has been applied successfully for positive
selection screens and, to a lesser extent, in
negative selection screens. The latter approach
can be affected by the under-representation of
individual vectors due to library construction and
virus production, the limits of the detection system
to measure highly complex populations, or
due to cross-hybridization and background issues
associated with barcode arrays. However, owing
to technical advances in the design and generation
of the shRNAs and barcodes, the pooledformat
approach has recently found its entry into
negative selection screens [54,55].
Both RNAi platforms, as reviewed by
Mullenders and Bernards, have led to the identification
of novel modulators in signaling pathways,
yielded insight into complex biological
processes and will undoubtedly contribute to the
discovery of potential cancer drug targets [50].
Several screens have selected genes based on
their effects on proliferation or the induction of
apoptosis. When such screens are performed in
a pair of cell lines, one of which carries a specific
genetic alteration, it is possible to identify
genes that have a synthetic lethal interaction
with that specific genetic alteration. Several
future science group www.futuremedicine.com 1793

Exploration of synthetic lethal interactions as cancer drug targets Review

labs have applied such screening systems, and
those that have been completed are discussed
below (Table 1). Although these screens have been
productive and initial results are encouraging,
we likely have only seen the beginning of the
potential outcomes.

RNAi screening systems & models for the
identification of genetic interactions
One of the first genetic interaction siRNA
screens in human cells was aimed at the identification
of genes that, upon knockdown, selectively
sensitize MYC overexpressing cells to a
DR5-agonistic antibody [56]. DR5 is one of
the five receptors that can bind TNF-related
apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL) and like
TRAIL, DR5-agonistic antibodies can stimulate
DR5-mediated apoptotic signaling. The
cytokine TRAIL and DR5-agonistic antibodies
have received much attention as potential cancer
therapeutics, and several tumors, including those
with high expression of MYC, display increased
sensitivity [57]. Rottmann et al. screened a library
of 624 siRNAs and identified 13 hits including
GSK3b that upon knockdown differentially
sensitizes a MYC overexpressing cell line [56].
It was previously shown that GSK3b phosphorylates
MYC resulting in SCFFBW7-mediated

ubiquitination and subsequent proteasomal
degradation [58]. As a consequence, knockdown
of either GSK3b or FBW7 results in increased
levels of MYC and its downstream target DR5.
Because DR5 is required in a dose-dependent
manner for DR5-agonistic antibody-mediated
apoptosis, high expression or stabilization of
MYC results in increased sensitivity. Hence,
MYC and proteins controlling the levels of MYC
might act as indirect markers for the treatment
response to TRAIL and DR5-agonistic antibodies.
The use of GSK3b inhibitors could
be beneficial in combination with TRAIL or
DR5-agonistic antibody therapies. The question
remains whether GSK3b inhibition by
itself induces apoptosis in MYC overexpressing
cells, as high levels of MYC are associated with
apoptosis. If this is not the case this would suggest
that the genetic interaction between GSK3b
and MYC is restricted to a context wherein the
DR5 receptor is sufficiently activated.
Another RNAi screen was designed to identify
lethal genes in specific cell types. Ngo
et al. used an inducible shRNA library targeting
approximately 700 genes selected on their
relevance to cancer cell proliferation and survival
[59]. Using this library, they identified
several genes that are specifically required for

Library

Format

Screening model

Readout

Synthetic siRNAs

Single well

Cell viability and/or cell death Relative abundance and depletion

Pooled

Vector-based shRNAs

Isogenic cell lines

Cell line panel based
on distinct tumor types

Cell line panel based
on mutational status

Figure 1. Screening systems and models for cancer-specific vurnerabilities. Advances in the
field of RNAi have led to the generation of several distinct siRNA and shRNA libraries, which can be
used in single-well, or in the case of shRNA libraries, in either single-well or pooled format screens.
To identify cancer-specific vulnerabilities, three strategies can be taken: a RNAi screen in isogenic cell
lines, a panel of cell lines based on their tumor type or a panel of cell lines for which the mutation
status for a given gene is known. When the single-well approach is taken, the effect of the siRNA or
shRNA on the viability of the cell can be measured with either cell viability or cell death assays.
In the case of a pooled shRNA library approach, a microarray barcode or deep-sequencing readout
can be used for measuring the negative selection against a shRNA over time.
1794 Future Oncol. (2010) 6(11) future science group

Review Kuiken & Beijersbergen

the survival of activated B-cell-like diffuse
large B-cell lymphoma (DLBCL) cells, but
not germinal center B-cell-like DLBCL cells.
Among the hits were genes involved in NF-kB
signaling, including CARD11. The identification
of NF-kB components validates the screen
as it was previously shown that DLBCL cells
are dependent on NF-kB activation for their
survival [60]. Similarly, Shaffer et al., using an
inducible shNRA library, screened for genes
that, upon knockdown, selectively kill myeloma
cell lines but not lymphoma cell lines [61]. They
validated IRF4 as a crucial transcription factor
for myeloma cells. IRF4 controls the expression
of a large number of genes including MYC,
which implied that the selective sensitivity to
IRF4 knockdown can be the result of changes
in expression of one of many, or even a combination
of target genes. Hence, additional
research will be required to fully understand the
mechanism behind this selectivity. Despite the
fact that these screening models wherein two
or more tumor types are used as a query panel
do not allow pinpointing of the gene associated
with the genetic interaction, the genes identified
can be of great interest as tumor-type-specific
drug targets.
Naik et al. took a different approach to identify
synthetic lethal interactions [62]. They tested
a siRNA collection targeting kinases for genes
involved in the WNT pathway as measured by
a WNT/b-catenin luciferase reporter. As a fraction
of colon cancers have constitutive activation
of the WNT pathway, and have become
addicted to this pathway activation, the identification
of genes that upon knockdown reduce the
WNT/b-catenin luciferase reporter activity represent
interesting drug targets. This screen led to
the identification of five genes that upon knockdown
reduced the WNT/b-catenin reporter
activity, including VEGFR1. Follow-up experiments
showed that knockdown of VEGFR1 is
only toxic to colon cancer cell lines, which have
constitutive activation of, and are addicted to the
WNT pathway. Knockdown of VEGFR1 results
in decreased phophorylation of b-catenin, but
does not affect the stability or nuclear accumulation
of b-catenin. Thus VEGFR1-mediated
direct or indirect phosphorylation of b-catenin
might be required for b-catenin-dependent transcription.
Although the approach taken in this
screen led to the identification of a specific vulnerability
to VEGFR1 inhibition for cells with an
addiction to an activated WNT/b-catenin pathway,
it was restricted to the identification of genes
Table 1. RNAi screens for synthetic lethal interactions with genetic alterations in human cancer.
Author
directly involved in b-catenin-mediated activity

Library type Library size Targets

Assay

System

Hits (n) Validated hits

Ref.

Rottmann et al.
(2005)

siRNA

624

Kinases

Single well 
(cell viability)
MYC isogenic cell lines

13

1 (GSK3b)

[56]

Ngo et al.
(2006)

Inducible shRNA 683

NA

Barcode

B-cell-like DLBCL vs germinal 
center B-cell-like DLBCL

15

1 (CARD11)

[59]

Shaffer et al.
(2008)

Inducible shRNA ~2500

Genome wide

Barcode

Myeloma vs lymphoma

NA

1 (IRF4)

[61]

Naik et al.
(2009)

siRNA

691

Kinases

Reporter

WNT/b-cat luciferase reporter 
followed by validation in 
WNT/b-cat addicted cell lines
11

5 (Cdc2L1, Lmtk3, Pank2, ErbB3 
and VEGFR)

[62]

Bommi-Reddy 
et al. (2008)
shRNA

88

Kinases

Single well 
(cell viability)
Two pairs of VHL isogenic 
cell lines

28

5 (CDK6, HER4, IRR, MAP2K1 
and MET)

[63]

Sarthy et al.
(2007)

siRNA ~4000

Genome wide

Single well 
(apoptosis)
KRAS isogenic cell lines

3

1 (Survivin)

[64]

Luo et al.
(2009)

shRNA

32293

Genome wide

Barcode

Two pairs of KRAS isogenic 
cell lines

50

13 (THOC1, DHX8, USP39, 
Ubc9, COPS3, COPS4, hMis18
a,

CASC5, borealin, SMC4, PLK1, 
APC1 and APC4)

[65]

Scholl et al.
(2009)

shRNA

1011

Kinases, phosphatases and 
cancer-related genes

Single well 
(cell viability)
Panel of tumor cell lines with 
known RAS status

1

1 (STK33)

[67]

Barbie et al.
(2009)

shRNA

957

Kinases, phosphatases and 
cancer-related genes

Single well 
(cell viability)
Panel of tumor cell lines with 
known RAS status

45

1 (TBK1)

[68]

DLBCL: Diffuse large B-cell lymphoma; KRAS: Kirsten ras protein; VHL: Von Hippel–Lindau.
future science group www.futuremedicine.com 1795

Exploration of synthetic lethal interactions as cancer drug targets Review

of an artificial reporter, and did not allow identification
of vulnerabilities connected to altered
expression of genes as a consequence of activation
of the WNT/b-catenin pathway. Nevertheless,
VEGFR1 might be an interesting candidate
for the treatment of WNT/b-catenin-addicted
colon cancers.
Bommi-Reddy et al. performed a true synthetic
genetic interaction screen for genes that specifically
affect the viability of cells that have lost the
expression of Von Hippel–Lindau (VHL) [63].
They infected two pairs of isogenic cell lines with
100 shRNAs targeting 88 kinases, representing
a preselected set based on viability screens executed
in HeLa and HEK293 cell lines. One of
the five validated hits was CDK6. It was shown
that VHL-/- cells are more sensitive to a CDK4/6
inhibitor than the wild-type VHL reconstituted
cell lines. Although the mechanism behind these
synthetic genetic interactions remains to be elucidated,
these observations do suggest that patients
with clear cell renal carcinomas that have frequently
inactivated VHL might benefit from
targeted molecular therapeutics for CDK6.

RNAi screens for synthetic lethal
interactions with oncogenic RAS
Several groups have undertaken RNAi screens
aimed at the identification of synthetic genetic
interactions with oncogenic RAS, a protein that
until now has escaped direct inhibition by small
molecules. Sarthy et al. screened a siRNA library
targeting 4000 genes for selective toxicity with
mutant KRAS and found that KRAS cells are
more sensitive to depletion of survivin. They
showed that survivin knockdown results in a
G2/M arrest followed by resynthesis of DNA
and polyploidy due to a failure to undergo cell
division [64]. In another effort, Luo et al. screened
a genome-wide shRNA library in a pooled format
and identified several genes, which upon
knockdown show selective growth impairment
for KRAS-mutant cells [65]. These genes included
components of the anaphase promoting complex
(APC/C) and PLK1, suggesting an increased
dependency of KRAS-mutant cells on mitotic
checkpoints and progression. Interestingly, these
KRAS-mutant cell lines are also more sensitive to
treatment with a PLK1 inhibitor. Furthermore,
xenograft models in mice using these cell lines
show regression upon treatment with the PLK1
inhibitor. This and many other studies suggest
that PLK1 inhibitors might be effective in treating
a broad range of tumors. A comprehensive
discussion on PLK1 and the therapeutic potential
of PLK1 inhibitors is given by Strebhardt and

Ullrich [66]. Although these KRAS-mutant cells
show an increased mitotic index and a higher
fraction of lagging chromosomes, the mechanism
behind the mitotic-specific vulnerabilities
is still unclear. PLK1 inhibitors are currently
in clinical trials and it will be very interesting
to see whether RAS tumors show an increased
sensitivity in a clinical setting.
The single-well shRNA screen described
by Scholl et al. led to the identification of
STK33 [67]. The oncogenic KRAS-dependent
effects were tested in a large panel of tumor cell
lines from different origins and showed that the
dependency on STK33 correlated with addiction
to oncogenic KRAS expression. In addition to a
reduction of cell viability in vitro under adherent
conditions, knockdown of STK33 reduced the
number of colonies in soft agar, and impaired
tumor growth of KRAS-mutant cell lines in
mouse xenograft experiments. Knockdown
of STK33 causes reduction of the levels of
phosphorylated S6K1, resulting in decreased
phosphorylation of S6K1’s target BAD. As a
consequence, BAD is stabilized and promotes
apoptosis. Knockdown of BAD rescues cells
from apoptosis induced by STK33 knockdown,
indicating that BAD-mediated apoptosis is
required for the STK33 dependency. However,
BAD knockdown cannot rescue KRAS-addicted
cells from KRAS knockdown suggesting that,
in addition to BAD-mediated apoptosis, loss of
mutant KRAS expression results in additional,
BAD-independent, pro-apoptotic signaling.
Finally, Barbie et al. performed a single-well
shRNA screen in 19 different cell lines to identify
synthetic genetic interactions with oncogenic
KRAS [68]. They identified a synthetic
lethal interaction between KRAS and TBK1,
and were able to validate this interaction in an
isogenic cell line panel and an independent panel
of lung cancer cell lines. The impaired growth
upon knockdown of TBK1 in this cell line panel
correlated with the lethal effect of KRAS knockdown,
indicating that the dependency on TBK1
is correlated with addiction to oncogenic KRAS.
Analysis of the expression profiles derived from
the isogenic cell lines suggested that oncogenic
KRAS activates the NF-kB pathway resulting
in a prosurvival signal. This is concordant
with the observation that upon knockdown of
TBK1, total and nuclear levels of the NF-kB
family member c-Rel decrease, as well as the
c-Rel target BCL-XL, an antiapoptotic protein.
Interestingly, in the absence of KRAS addiction,
knockdown of either STK33 or TBK1
does not result in a synthetic lethal phenotype.
1796 Future Oncol. (2010) 6(11) future science group

Review Kuiken & Beijersbergen

Similar to the WNT/b-catenin and VEGFR1
interaction, the observations by Scholl et al. and
Barbie et al. suggest that STK33 and TBK1 do
not have a direct genetic interaction with KRAS,
but are linked to characteristics associated with
the addiction to oncogenic KRAS signaling.
Together with a biomarker that classifies tumors
that are addicted to oncogenic KRAS signaling,
STK33, TBK1 and similar genes can be
exploited therapeutically.

Lessons learned & challenges ahead
It has become clear that many approaches can be
taken to screen for novel drug targets. Whether
the screen is aimed at the identification of synthetic
lethal interactions or genes for which a
differential dependency exists between tumor
types, they will undoubtedly provide us with
novel candidate drug targets for cancer therapy.
Although it is less effort to screen a pair of isogenic
cell lines, synthetic genetic interactions
that show a high degree of context independency
are more likely to be clinically relevant. On the
other hand, synthetic lethal interactions identified
based on a number of cell lines should also
be validated in a relevant isogenic cell line pair
to exclude the effects of confounding mutations
and adaptations contributing to the synthetic
genetic interaction. Technical advances related
to screening with pooled shRNA libraries, particularly
those allowing for hit selection based
on negative selection, can be used to identify
genes that, upon knockdown, are only lethal in
a specific subset out of a large and diverse set
of different cancer cell lines [54,55]. Although
several screens discussed above have yielded
interesting candidates for cancer-specific drug
therapy, additional research is required to fully
understand the molecular basis of the contextspecific
dependency. Of specific interest are the
screens that identified genes for which a dependency
exists that correlate with the addiction of
a cell to a certain oncogenic lesion (e.g., STK33
with KRAS). Further research will undoubtedly
increase our understanding of these network
addictions, and provide an explanation
for the fact that only a fraction of tumor cell
lines harboring such genetic lesions displays
an addiction.
It is clear from published work that the percentage
of hits that hold true in a larger panel
of cell lines can be quite low. Despite the fact
that this approach will help the researcher to
narrow down the hit list to the most relevant
candidates to pursue, he or she might falsely discard
a relevant hit. Controlling for comparable

knockdown efficiency when testing in multiple
cell lines might reduce this risk, but will also
make the validation more laborious.
Many of the RNAi-based screen publications
contain follow-up on hits that have previously
been linked with the phenotype or pathway
of interest. When hit lists are long, pathway
analyses or queries in interaction databases are
frequently performed to narrow down the list
to a manageable number of hits for which hypotheses
can be raised and tested with a higher
confidence of success than would be applicable
to hits for which no link has been established yet,
or for which no biological information is available.
It is questionable whether this undermines
the unbiased screening approach as it implicates
neglecting true novel hits. One way to prevent
this is by performing high-throughput follow-up
studies with secondary assays to pinpoint the
approximate level of action for signaling pathways.
Another approach is to combine the analysis
with that of clinical data, including therapy
responses. This will lead to a more rapid identification
of those hits that are clinically relevant
and can be explored for therapy.
Despite ample examples of RNAi screens in
identifying novel targets, novel biomarkers, and
detailed insights in complex molecular networks
controlling essential aspects of tumor cell behavior
and survival, it is clear that the elaborate validation
and follow-up of RNAi screening results
still pose a significant barrier in the interpretation
of the genes identified. The results of RNAi
experiments can be influenced by the alteration
of the expression of genes other than the intended
target, known as off-target effects. As a consequence,
multiple individual siRNA or shRNA
sequences are required to display the same phenotype.
In addition, one should confirm the knockdown
phenotype correlation for the individual
reagents and where possible rescue experiments
should be performed with cDNA sequences that
are resistant to the RNAi effects. These validation
steps are both complicated and time consuming
and as a result most screening efforts have
only validated a very limited set of genes rather
than generating completely validated gene lists.
Technical advances in the field of RNAi reagents
that reduce off-target effects and the generation of
matching RNAi-resistant cDNA rescue libraries
might bring some change to this.
Most of the RNAi screens and follow-up
experiments are performed in cell lines grown as
a monolayer in vitro. The extrapolation of these
results to an in vivo situation and even clinical
responses remains to be investigated. Several
future science group www.futuremedicine.com 1797

Exploration of synthetic lethal interactions as cancer drug targets Review

studies have addressed this issue, in part, for the
identified hits, including the studies of Scholl
et al. and Luo et al. [65,67]. Luo et al. confirmed
the dependency on PLK1 in a mouse xenograft
model with a PLK1 inhibitor rather than PLK1
knockdown [65]. It is worth noting that most of
the small molecules act by impairing a protein’s
function and therefore do not necessary mimic
the effect of reduced protein levels upon RNAimediated
knockdown. However, PLK1 inhibitors
are currently being investigated in the clinic,
and this might provide clinical confirmation of
this RAS-specific vulnerability.

RNAi drug enhancer, resistance
& chemical genetic screens
RNAi screening technology can also be applied
to identify genes that upon knockdown sensitize
cells to a specific cancer drug. Such genes
can be used as targets in combination therapy,
but can also act as potential biomarkers of drug
response. Drug-enhancer screens have been
performed using conventional cytotoxic drugs,
including paclitaxel, gemcitabine, cisplatin,
doxorubicin and fluorouracil [69–74]. However,
there are also some examples of RNAi screens for
drug-enhancing effects with targeted molecular
therapeutics, such as TRAIL and PARP inhibitors
[75,76]. Turner et al. performed a siRNA
screen to identify kinases that upon knockdown
sensitize cells to a PARP inhibitor [76]. Among
the four validated genes that upon knockdown
enhance the sensitivity is CDK5, a gene that has
not been linked to DNA damage repair or DNA
damage response before. The sensitizing effect
of CDK5 suppression is not limited to PARP
inhibition but is also associated with enhanced
sensitivity to treatment with camptotecin and
cisplatin. Although the molecular mechanism
behind the increased sensitivity to these therapeutics
remains to be elucidated, these findings
demonstrate the power of drug-enhancer screens
in identifying novel drug response modulators.
Furthermore, drug-enhancer screens with targeted
therapeutics can result in the identification
of genetic interactions between the identified
gene and the drug target, such as the
CDK5–PARP interaction.
In addition to drug-enhancer screens, RNAi
can be used for the identification of genes that
upon knockdown confer resistance to a specific
drug treatment [18,25,77–79]. Iorns et al. describe a
siRNA screen compromising the human kinome
to identify kinases involved in the response to
tamoxifen in estrogen receptor-positive breast
cancer [79]. They subsequently showed that one of

their validated hits, CDK10, regulates the expression
of c-RAF. The increase of c-RAF expression
results in activation of the downstream p42/p44
MAPK pathway, which has previously been
implicated in tamoxifen resistance. As reduced
levels of CDK10 expression confer resistance to
tamoxifen, Iorns et al. analyzed whether CDK10
expression can be used to predict the response
in patients treated with tamoxifen. From this
analysis, they concluded that low expression of
CDK10 was associated with a statistical significantly
shorter time to disease progression, and
significantly shorter overall survival. This and
other examples clearly illustrate the potential
of large-scale RNAi screens to identify novel
mechanisms of drug resistance.
In addition to synthetic genetic interaction
screens and RNAi drug-enhancer screens, several
chemical–genetic screens have been performed in
which chemical compounds are screened for selective
toxicity in isogenic cell lines [80–82]. Although
both RNAi and a specific inhibitor would impair
protein function, they are not completely complementary
to each other. The partial or complete
loss of protein expression by RNAi can be dissimilar
to the consequence of treatment with a
chemical agent. For example, loss of expression
can result in both the loss of a protein’s activity
as well as disruption of protein complexes, while
binding of an inhibitor can specifically affect
either protein activity or protein–protein interactions.
Hence, chemical–genetic screens will
complement the synthetic genetic screens in the
identification of novel cancer-specific drug targets
and therapeutics.

Conclusion
The recent developments in RNAi-based screening
tools have provided a powerful combination
of target identification in a functional manner,
and on a genome-wide scale. The implementation
of this strategy in an unbiased search
for synthetic interactions in mammalian cells
has resulted in a number of potential targets.
Although these targets still need further validation
in vivo and inhibitors should be developed
to test their value in clinical settings, they do
show the promise of RNAi-based screening in
cancer drug target discovery. In addition to
further validation as drug targets, additional
research is required to fully understand the
molecular basis of the context specific dependency.
Of specific interest are the screens that
identified genes for which a dependency exists
that correlate with the addiction of a cell to a certain
oncogenic lesion (e.g., STK33 with KRAS).
1798 Future Oncol. (2010) 6(11) future science group

Review Kuiken & Beijersbergen

Further research might increase our understanding
of these network addictions, which are only
present in a fraction of tumor cell lines harboring
such genetic lesions. Moreover, the identification
of biomarkers for such addicted tumors will
help selecting the patients that are most likely to
respond to this type of targeted therapies.

Future perspective
Since its discovery, RNAi made it possible to
interrogate the role of individual genes in complex
cellular processes. In combination with
the unraveling of the complete human genome,
genome-wide RNAi screens can be performed
that can identify, in an unbiased way, genes
involved in biological and clinical relevant processes.
Developments in RNAi-based screening
technologies have fuelled the expectation of new
discoveries. These include the identification of
novel targets, novel biomarkers and detailed
insights in complex molecular networks controlling
essential aspects of tumor cell behavior
and survival. It is to be expected that in the
coming years improvements in not only RNAi

technologies, but also in screening models and
validation strategies, will increase the output
of RNAi screens. We will see an expansion of
RNAi screening reagents, including large collections
with validated knockdown and a better
understanding of potential off-target effects
and strategies to exclude or prevent them. These
developments will be followed by an increase
in throughput, miniaturization and highthroughput
validation reagents and methods.
One major development will be the routine
implementation of spotted RNAi reagents on
glass slides to enable high-throughput, highcontent
screens in living cells. Further development
of more complicated phenotypical readouts
will increase the relevance of the cellular
screening models, resulting in more relevant hits.
At the same time, rather than end-point assays,
the developments in kinetic measurements will
more specifically address the questions of the
role of individual components in complex cellular
networks. This will undoubtedly lead to
a better and more complete understanding of
the regulatory networks and more importantly

Executive summary

The need for cancer-specific treatment strategies

n	Despite the established effectiveness of conventional cancer therapeutics, their shared mode of action – interference with cell division
or DNA replication processes by causing DNA damage – is generally associated with low therapeutic indices.

n	As the conventional cancer therapeutics rely on cell division, they do not target dormant tumor cells, which might include cancer stem
or initiator cells.

n	Hence, there is a need for cancer-specific therapeutics that do not solely rely on cell division for their effects.
Targeted cancer therapies & network addiction
n	Targeted therapeutics, including those based on pathway-targeted therapeutics, are based on the addiction of a tumor to certain
cancer-specific cellular signaling pathways, and target the driving oncogenic event.
n	Resistance mechanisms to these targeted therapeutics confirm the importance of oncogenic network addiction, and can direct us to
critical nodes in cancer signaling pathways.
n	In addition to addiction to oncogenic signaling, tumor cells can become hypersensitive to the reactivation of tumor-suppressor genes.
Molecular buffering & genetic interactions
n	Not all cancer-specific lesions that lead to an addiction or acquired hypersensitivity can be targeted, however, up- or down-stream
effectors can provide an indirect means of targeting these lesions.
n	In addition, distinct networks that buffer overlapping cellular processes can contain valuable drug targets in the context of untargetable
genetic lesions.
n	Comparison of genetic interaction data from Caenorhabditis elegans with that of Saccharomyces cerevisiae has taught us that these
genetic interactions are either not well conserved or masked by cellular-level redundancy in multicellular organisms.
n	Consequently, unbiased functional genomic screens are required to identify negative genetic interactions with oncogenes or
tumor-suppressor genes in human cancer.
n	The identification of such interactions can yield novel drug targets and guide further investigation of cancer-specific vulnerabilities.
RNAi as a tool for functional genomics & identification of synthetic lethal interactions
n	RNAi is the mechanism whereby introduction of dsRNA into a cell results in the degradation of a mRNA product that shares high
complementarity with the dsRNA.
n	Advances in the field of generating tools that mediate RNAi have yielded an extensive set of genome-wide RNAi libraries.
n	Use of RNAi libraries in combination with a wide variety of assays have allowed the identification of novel modulators in signaling
pathways and yielded insight into complex biological processes.
n	Screens designed for the identification of genes involved in proliferation and apoptosis, or that have synthetic lethal interactions with
oncogenes or tumor-suppressor genes will undoubtedly contribute to the discovery of novel cancer drug targets.
future science group www.futuremedicine.com 1799

Exploration of synthetic lethal interactions as cancer drug targets Review

Financial & competing interests disclosure
The authors have no relevant affiliations or financial
involvement with any organization or entity with a
financial interest in or financial conflict with the subject
matter or materials discussed in the manuscript.
This includes employment, consultancies, honoraria,
stock ownership or options, expert testimony, grants or
patents received or pending, or royalties.
No writing assistance was utilized in the production
of this manuscript.

Executive summary

RNAi screens for synthetic lethal interactions with oncogenic RAS

n	RAS-mutant cells are more sensitive to perturbations in mitosis as reflected by an increased sensitivity to inhibition of survivin, APC/C or
PLK1 function.

n	Oncogene-addicted Ras mutant cells are also more sensitive to inhibition of STK33, which is required for the suppression of BAD’s
function as a pro-apoptotic factor.

n	In addition, RAS-mutant cells are specifically sensitive to inhibition of TBK1, which is involved in NF-kB signaling and controls the
expression of BCL-XL, an antiapoptotic protein.

n	Both TBK1 and STK33 have a genetic interaction with mutant RAS that is limited to cells that display an addiction to oncogenic
RAS signaling.
Lessons learned & challenges ahead
n	Several RNAi synthetic lethal screens have been completed and resulted in the identification and subsequent validation of a small
number of hits, most of which had a previously established link. Unbiased follow-up strategies might increase the list of validated hits.
n	Synthetic lethal interactions identified in screens encompassing a panel of cell lines with known mutational status, require validation in
isogenic cell lines to exclude interactions with confounding genetic events, and visa versa, hits from screens in isogenic cell lines need
validation in other cell lines to exclude context dependency.
n	Technical advances in the field of RNAi reagents that reduce off-target effects and the generation of matching RNAi resistant cDNA
libraries will simplify the currently elaborate validation experiments.
n	In vivo experiments, preferably with small-molecule inhibitors, are needed to investigate the potential of the identified genetic
interactions as drug targets.
RNAi drug enhancer, resistance & chemical genetic screens
n	In addition to genetic interaction screens, RNAi drug enhancer, resistance and chemical genetic screens can contribute to our
understanding of network addiction and tumor-specific vulnerabilities.
n	Furthermore, enhancer and resistance screens can lead to the identification of valuable biomarkers that may help guide selection of
patients that will benefit most from a certain therapy.
n	Chemical–genetic screens complement RNAi genetic screens in that they have distinct modes of action regarding the suppression of a
protein’s function; hindering protein–protein interaction, protein stability or catalytic activity verus suppression of gene expression.
Conclusion
n	The recent developments in RNAi-based screening tools have resulted in a number of potential cancer drug targets based on synthetic
lethal interactions.
n	Further validation of these hits in vitro, but especially in vivo, and preferably with small-molecule inhibitors, can further pave the road to
clinical implementation.
n	More research is required to elucidate mechanisms of network addiction and to identify biomarkers for tumors that are addicted to
specific network signaling. This will help select patients that are most likely to benefit from this type of targeted therapy.
the crucial nodes within these networks. Finally,
the integration of other large-scale efforts with
RNAi screening results, such as expression profiling,
genomic alteration, complete genome
sequencing, protein–protein interaction networks
and the aforementioned complex, kinetic
cellular network models, will definitely aid better
hit stratification and result in the identification
of novel cancer-specific vulnerabilities.
Combination with the analysis of clinical data,
including therapy responses, will lead to a more
rapid identification of those hits that are clinically
relevant and can be explored for therapy.
The increase in screening speed and scale will
result in more detailed understanding of network
addiction and resistance to targeted therapies.
This will further aid the selection of crucial
nodes in cellular signaling networks relevant
for tumor cell behavior and clinical response.
Targeted therapies for such nodes might be less
prone to acquired resistance, and applicable to
a wider range of tumors that share a network

addiction driven by distinct genetic lesions.
Based on these results, we will be able to predict
which tumors are vulnerable to the inhibition
of specific genes, and as such we will be able
to select those patients that will benefit most
from the targeted therapy. All together, these
developments in RNAi screening technologies
and interpretation of the results will lead to the
identification of more relevant genes that can be
explored for more specific and effective cancer
treatment in a personalized manner.
1800 Future Oncol. (2010) 6(11) future science group

Review Kuiken & Beijersbergen

