Black plate (666,1)

Research Article
See perspective on p. 628

Lung-Cancer Chemoprevention by Induction of Synthetic
Lethality in Mutant KRAS Premalignant Cells
In Vitro and In Vivo

Shaoyi Huang1
, Xiaoyang Ren1
, Lai Wang3
, Ling Zhang1
, and Xiangwei Wu1,2

Abstract
Lung cancer is the leading cause of cancer death in both men and women in the United States, with a
low 5-year survival rate despite improved treatment strategies. These data underscore the great need for
effective chemoprevention of this cancer. Mutations and activation of KRAS occur frequently in, and are
thought to be a primary driver of the development of, non–small cell lung cancers (NSCLC) of the
adenocarcinoma subtype. In this study, we developed a new approach for the chemoprevention of NSCLC
involving specific targeting of apoptosis in mutant KRAS cells. This approach is based on a synthetic lethal
interaction among TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), the second mitochondria-derived
activator of caspase Smac/DIABLO (Smac), and KRAS. Mutational activation of KRAS modulated the
expression of TRAIL receptors by upregulating death receptors and downregulating decoy receptors.
Furthermore, oncogenic KRAS repressed cellular FADD-like interleukin 1b–converting enzyme (FLICE)-
like inhibitory protein (c-FLIP) expression through activation of Erk/mitogen-activated protein kinase
(MAPK)-mediated activation of c-Myc. Smac overcame KRAS-induced cell-survival signaling by antagonizing
X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein (XIAP). Therefore, the combination of TRAIL and a small
molecule mimic of Smac induced apoptosis specifically in mutant KRAS cells without harming normal
cells. We further showed that short-term, intermittent in vivo treatment with TRAIL and Smac mimic
induced apoptosis in tumor cells and reduced tumor burden in a murine model of KRAS-induced lung
cancer. These results reflect the potential benefit of a selective therapeutic approach for the chemoprevention
of NSCLC. Cancer Prev Res; 4(5); 666–73. 2011
AACR.

Introduction

Lung cancer has a 5-year U.S. survival rate of a discouraging
15% and continues to be the leading cause of cancer
death in the United States and worldwide despite some
improvement in survival over the past several decades (1,
2). A major reason for this dismal survival rate is that the
majority of lung cancer patients are diagnosed at incurable
late stages. Approximately 90% of lung cancer cases are
related to tobacco smoking (3). Recent decreases in smoking
have led to a downturn in lung cancer death rates in the
United States, but smoking rates continue to increase
worldwide. It is well known that the incidence of lung
cancer decreases slowly after smoking cessation, ensuring

that the lung cancer epidemic will continue for many years.
Smoking cessation is clearly the most effective way to
reduce lung cancer risk, but although reduced, the risk
remains substantial in former smokers, who represent the
majority of lung cancer diagnoses in the United States (4).
Therefore, there is an urgent need to identify additional
strategies to reduce the burden of lung cancer.
RAS genes encode a family of membrane-localized 21-
kDa GTP-binding proteins that functions as a molecular
switch linking receptor and nonreceptor tyrosine kinase
activation to downstream cytoplasmic or nuclear events in
regulating cell growth, differentiation, and apoptosis (5, 6).
The RAS proteins interact with multiple effectors in the
mitogen-activated protein kinase (MAPK), signal transducer
and activator of transcription (STAT), and phosphoinositide
3-kinase (PI3K) signaling cascades (7). Found in
approximately 30% of all human cancers, activating RAS
mutations result in gene products of impaired guanosine
triphosphatase (GTPase) activity that leads to constitutive
activation of RAS signaling. KRAS accounts for most of the
cancer-related RAS mutations, including in non–small cell
lung cancers (NSCLC; refs. 8, 9). KRAS mutations also are
present in individuals at risk (but without cancer) who
have significant tobacco exposure and are detected in 25%

Authors' Affiliations: Departments of 1
Head and Neck Surgery and 2
Molecular and Cellular Oncology, The University of Texas MD Anderson
Cancer Center, Houston, TX; and 3
Joyant Pharmaceuticals, Dallas, TX
Corresponding Author: Xiangwei Wu, Department of Head and Neck
Surgery, Unit 123, The University of Texas MD Anderson Cancer Center,
1515 Holcombe Blvd., Houston, TX 77030. Phone: 713-745-2867; Fax:
713-745-2234. E-mail: xwwu@mdanderson.org.
doi: 10.1158/1940-6207.CAPR-10-0235
2011
American Association for Cancer Research.

Cancer
Prevention
Research

666 Cancer Prev Res; 4(5) May 2011

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/cancerpreventionresearch/article-pdf/4/5/666/2337771/666.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
Black plate (667,1)

to 40% of atypical adenomatous hyperplasia lesions, which
are a potential precursor of adenocarcinoma (10). Therefore,
KRAS mutations seem to be an early event in human
NSCLC development and may be a good target for lung
cancer prevention.
Years of research in the chemoprevention of lung cancer
have been frustratingly unable to generate any effective
agents in clinical trials (11). Certain agents, such as COX
inhibitors, have shown some activity against lung cancer in
animal models. They are, however, moderate in effect,
require long-term continuous administration, and have
safety concerns (11, 12) We proposed a new concept of
therapy-like chemoprevention as a way to circumvent these
common limitations of chemoprevention This approach is
discussed in detail in Discussion.
TNF-related apoptosis-inducing ligand (TRAIL), or
Apo2L, is a potent cell-death inducer (13, 14) and interacts
with an unusually complex receptor system in humans
comprising 2 death receptors and 3 decoy receptors
(15). TRAIL binding to its death receptors 4 and 5 (DR4,
DR5) leads to apoptosis by activating caspases 8 and 10
(16). The interaction of TRAIL with its decoy receptors 1
and 2 (DcR1, DcR2) and Osteoprotegerin (OPG), which
lack functional cytoplasmic signaling domains, results in
defective death signaling (17). Interest in TRAIL increased
recently after TRAIL selectively induced apoptosis in a wide
variety of transformed human tumor cell lines in vitro and
as xenografts without affecting normal cells (18). TRAIL has
not produced toxicity in cynomolgus monkeys and chimpanzees
(19–21), and proapoptotic DR4 or DR5 agonists
(e.g., the monoclonal antibodies mapatumumab and apomab)
have produced little or no toxicity in phase-1 clinical
trials (22, 23).
Another important protein in regulating apoptosis in
cancer cells is the X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis protein
(XIAP; ref. 24). Frequently overexpressed in cancer cells,
XIAP negatively regulates apoptosis by directly inhibiting
caspases 3 and 7 activity (25). XIAP activity is regulated by
the second mitochondrial protein Smac/DIABLO (Smac).
Release of Smac from mitochondria leads to its binding to
XIAP and antagonizes the caspase–XIAP interaction,
thereby promoting apoptosis (26, 27).
We recently reported results of a therapy-like approach
for cancer chemoprevention involving the synthetic lethal
interaction among TRAIL, retinyl acetate (RAc), and adenomatous
polyposis coli (APC) signaling pathways (28).
TRAIL plus RAc specifically induced apoptosis in APCdeficient
cells through the activation of c-Myc and was
effective chemoprevention of colorectal cancer in animal
models (28). It has been shown that activation of RAS
could lead to the activation of c-Myc (29). Therefore,
TRAIL plus RAc has the potential to target the RAS
signaling pathway in inducing apoptosis. However,
RAS can also activate a prominent cell-survival pathway
mediated by the activation of AKT, leading to inhibition
of caspase activation by XIAP. We hypothesize that Smac
would overcome these survival signals by antagonizing
XIAP and thus facilitate apoptosis. This facilitation may

provide a potent strategy for eliminating mutant KRAS
premalignant cells and a therapeutic approach for preventing
lung cancer. We report here our results with
TRAIL plus a small-molecule Smac mimic in inducing
apoptosis in in vitro and in vivo models of mutant KRAS
lung premalignancy.

Materials and Methods

Plasmids, shRNAs, and reagents
The retroviral plasmid expressing a mutant KRAS
(KRASV12) was reported earlier (30). Erk dominant-negative
and ATK/PKB dominant-negative constructs were
generously provided by Dr. Mien-Chie Hung of M.D.
Anderson Cancer Center (31). The full-length cellular
FADD-like interleukin 1b–converting enzyme (FLICE)-
like inhibitory protein (c-FLIP) cDNA was generated
by reverse transcriptase PCR of total RNA from Hela
cells, as previously reported (28). The c-Myc-shRNA
was described earlier (28). XIAP-shRNA was purchased
from Openbiosystems. TRAIL was prepared according to
published results (32). The small-molecule Smac mimic
JP1584 was produced by Joyant Pharmaceuticals. U0126
and Wortmannin were purchased from CalBiochem.

Antibodies and Western blots
Anti–c-FLIP was obtained from ALEXIS Biochemicals.
Anti–phospho-Erk, anti–phospho-AKT, anti–cleaved caspase
3 and anti-DR5 were purchased from Cell Signaling
Technology. Anti–c-Myc was purchased from Millipore.
Anti–b-actin and anti–a-tubulin were purchased from
Sigma. Antibodies against DcR1 and DcR2 were purchased
from Imgenex. Anti-DR4 was obtained from
Upstate. Anti-XIAP was purchased from BD Transduction
Laboratories. Anti–cleaved caspase 3 antibody was
obtained from Western blotting was carried out as
described previously (33).

Cell lines, infection, transfection, and drug treatment
Cells of the immortalized human bronchial epithelial
(HBE) cell line HBE4-E6/E7 (HBE4) were purchased from
ATCC. BW1799 cells were kindly provided by Dr. Reuben
Lotan of M.D. Anderson Cancer Center and were maintained
in Keratinocyte-SFM medium (Gibco). Retrovirus
was generated by using the BOSC23 packaging cell line,
and infection was carried out as reported previously (30).
Transfections were carried out by using Lipofectamine
2000 (Invitrogen) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions. For TRAIL and Smac mimic treatment, cells
growing at the log phase were treated with Smac at a final
concentration of 100 nmol/L for 4 hours. Then TRAIL was
added to the media at a final concentration of 100 ng/mL.
Cells were harvested after 24 hours of TRAIL treatment.
Cells were treated with Wortmannin (200 nmol/L)
and U0126 (10 mmol/L) for 30 minutes. Cell viability
was determined by using Annexin V-FITC Apoptosis
Detection Kit (Sigma) according to the manufacturer’s
instructions.

Chemoprevention of Lung Cancer

www.aacrjournals.org Cancer Prev Res; 4(5) May 2011 667

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/cancerpreventionresearch/article-pdf/4/5/666/2337771/666.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
Black plate (668,1)

Tumor studies in mice
Breeding colonies were established from LSL-KrasG12D
mice acquired from the Mouse Repository of
the National Cancer Institute. AdenoCre virus was purchased
from the Gene Therapy Core of Baylor College of
Medicine. Mice were infected according to a previously
reported protocol (34, 35). In brief, AdenoCre-calcium
phosphate (AdCre-CaPi) precipitates were prepared by
placing recombinant adenovirus in 1 mL of Eagle’s minimal
essential media containing 1.8 mmol/L Ca2þ and
0.86 mmol/L Pi. Then an aliquot of a 2 mol/L CaCl2
solution was added to achieve a concentration of 4.5
mmol/L Ca2þ. The solution was mixed by vortex or gentle
pipette tip aspiration, and the mixture was allowed to
incubate for 20 to 30 minutes at room temperature. G12D
mice were anesthetized with avertin at 6 weeks of age.
AdCre-CaPi coprecipitates [5
108 pfu (plaque forming
units)] were administered intranasally in two 62.5-mL
instillations. The second instillation was administered
when breathing rates had returned to normal. Six weeks
after infection, the mice were injected intravenously with
Smac mimic (3 mg/kg). Six hours later, TRAIL (3 mg/kg)
was injected intraperitoneally. Injections were repeated
16 hours later. Consecutive injections of TRAIL and Smac
mimic were given a total of 3 times. Injection of PBS was
used as a control. For intermittent treatment, the mice
were given 3 consecutive injections of TRAIL and Smac
mimic (1.5 mg/kg) within a week, again 3 weeks later,
and then again 3 weeks later, for a total of 3 treatment
cycles. The mice were sacrificed 3 days after the last
treatment, and their lungs were inflated with formalin
and fixed in formalin overnight. Lung sections were
analyzed by hematoxylin and eosin (H&E) and immunohistochemistry
staining by using an anti–cleaved caspase
3 antibody, as reported previously (28).

Statistical analysis
We compared differences between groups via 1-way
ANOVA. Values with a P < 0.05 were considered to be
statistically significant.

Results

TRAIL and Smac mimic specifically induce apoptosis
in KRAS-activated HBE cells
To test the effect of RAS activation on TRAIL plus Smac
mimic–induced apoptosis, we introduced the activating
mutant KRASV12 into immortalized normal HBE4 cells.
Constitutive expression of mutant KRAS led to an increase
in RAS-GTPase activity and activation of downstream signaling
events, including phosphorylation of Erk and AKT in
mutant KRAS HBE4 (Fig. 1A). Normal HBE4 cells were
resistant to apoptosis induced by either TRAIL or Smac
mimic alone or combined (Fig. 1B). Expression of mutant
KRAS–sensitized cells to TRAIL plus Smac mimic–induced
apoptosis (Fig. 1B). RAc had no effect on cell viability either
alone or in combination with TRAIL and Smac mimic (data
not show). Similar results occurred in BW1799 cells
(Fig. 1A and C). These results suggest that activation of
KRAS specifically sensitizes normal HBE cells to TRAIL
and Smac mimic.

KRAS sensitizes cells to TRAIL and Smac mimic
through the MAPK/Erk pathway
To explore the contribution of two RAS-regulated pathways
(activation of MAPK/Erk and of AKT through PI3K) to
TRAIL plus Smac mimic–induced apoptosis in mutant
KRAS cells, we inhibited MAPK/Erk and AKT signaling with
either dominant-negative mutants or pharmacologic inhibitors.
Expression of dominant-negative mutants of Erks
(Erk1 and Erk2) inhibited KRAS-mediated phosphorylation
of Erks and TRAIL plus Smac mimic–induced apoptosis;
inhibition of AKT phosphorylation by the expression
of an AKT dominant-negative mutant did not affect TRAIL
plus Smac mimic–mediated cell death in mutant KRAS cells
(Fig. 2A and B). U0126, a MEK inhibitor upstream of Erk/
MAPK, reduced Erk phosphorylation and blocked TRAIL
plus Smac mimic–induced apoptosis in mutant KRAS cells,
whereas the PI3K inhibitor Wortmannin blocked AKT
phosphorylation but did not inhibit TRAIL plus Smac
mimic–induced apoptosis (Fig. 2A and B). These results

BW1799

C KRAS KRAS

Ras-GTP HBE4-C

HBE4-KRAS

% Annexin V+/PI− cells
p-Erk
p-AKT
0
20
40
60
80
100

Actin
Control
TRAIL
Smac
TRAIL
+ Smac

BW1799-C

BW1799-KRAS

% Annexin V+/PI− cells
0
20
40
60
80
100

Control
TRAIL
Smac
TRAIL
+ Smac

C
HBE4 A B C

Figure 1. Oncogenic KRAS activates RAS downstream-signaling pathways and sensitizes HBE cells to TRAIL and Smac mimic. A, activation of Ras- GTP
and induction of phosphorylation of Erk (p-ERK) and AKT (p-AKT) by KRAS in BW1799 and HBE4 cells. These cells were infected with either control
(C) or retrovirus-expressing mutant KRAS. B, induction of apoptosis by TRAIL and Smac mimic. HBE4 cells and BW1799 cells expressing oncogenic KRAS
were treated with TRAIL (100 ng/mL) or Smac mimic (100 nmol/L) or both or control (PBS) for 24 hours. Apoptotic cells (Annexin Vþ, PI) were counted.
The data represent results from 3 independent experiments. Averages and SD are shown.

Huang et al.

668 Cancer Prev Res; 4(5) May 2011 Cancer Prevention Research

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/cancerpreventionresearch/article-pdf/4/5/666/2337771/666.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
Black plate (669,1)

show that KRAS sensitized HBE cells to TRAIL and Smac
mimic through the MAPK/Erk pathway.

c-Myc and c-FLIP are downstream mediators of KRAS
in sensitizing cells to TRAIL and Smac mimic
To test our hypothesis that activation of KRAS induces
the expression of c-Myc, which in turn inhibits the expression
c-FLIP to sensitize cells to TRAIL and Smac mimic, we
first analyzed the expression of c-Myc and c-FLIP in mutant
KRAS cells. Expression of mutant KRAS resulted in
enhanced levels of c-Myc protein and a corresponding
decrease in c-FLIP protein expression (Fig. 3A). We next
investigated the functional significance of c-Myc and

c-FLIP. We first transfected c-Myc-shRNA into mutant KRAS
cells to knock down c-Myc expression. Transfection of cMyc-shRNA
abolished KRAS-mediated induction of c-Myc
expression and restored c-FLIP expression (Fig. 3B). More
important, knockdown of c-Myc significantly inhibited
TRAIL plus Smac mimic–induced apoptosis (Fig. 3D).
Furthermore, restoring c-FLIP expression by transfecting
a c-FLIP–expression plasmid-blocked TRAIL plus Smac
mimic–induced cell death in mutant KRAS cells (Fig. 3C
and D). These data support the ability of KRAS to sensitize
normal HBE cells to TRAIL and Smac mimic through
activating c-Myc and the subsequent repression of c-FLIP
expression.

Control
KRAS

c-Myc
Control
KRAS

A B CD

c-FLIP

Tubulin

c-Myc

c-FLIP

Actin

c-FLIP

% Annexin V+/PI− cells100
80
60
40
20
0
Actin

KRAS +
c-Myc-shRNA

c-MycshRNAKRASKRAS
+
c-FLIP

c-FLIP
KRAS +
KRAS
c-FLIP
 +

c-MycshRNAKRASFigure
3. Involvement of c-Myc and c-FLIP in TRAIL plus Smac mimic–induced apoptosis in oncogenic KRAS–expressing cells. A, KRAS-mediated
activation of c-Myc and repression of c-FLIP. HBE4 cells were infected with either control or KRAS-expressing retrovirus. B, effect of c-Myc knockdown. HBE4
cells were infected with either control or KRAS-expressing virus or were transfected with c-Myc-shRNA after KRAS infection. C, overexpression of
c-FLIP. HBE4 cells infected with KRAS were transfected with either control vector or c-FLIP DNA. D, induction of apoptosis. HBE4 cells with various infection
and transfection combinations were treated with TRAIL and Smac mimic. Apoptotic cells (Annexin Vþ, PI) were counted. The data represent results
from 3 independent experiments. Averages and SD are shown.

Vector AKTDN ErkDN Control Wortmannin
U0126

Vector
AKTDN
ErkDN
Control
Wortmannin

U0126

p-Erk

A B

100

80

60

% Annexin V+/PI− cells
40
20
0
p-AKT

Actin

Figure 2. The Erk/MAPK pathway is required for KRAS-mediated sensitization to TRAIL and Smac. A, inhibition of KRAS-mediated activation of ERK
and AKT. Phosphorylated Erk (p-ERK) and AKT (p-AKT) were assessed in HBE4-KRAS cells transfected with a dominant-negative AKT mutant (AKTDN) or
both Erk1 and Erk2 dominant-negative mutants (ErkDN) or vector (control), or in these cells treated with the PI3K inhibitor Wortmannin (200 nmol/L) or the dual
MEK1 and MEK2 inhibitor U0126 (10 mmol/L) or control (dimethyl sulfoxide). B, TRAIL- and Smac mimic–mediated apoptosis. The transfected or treated
HBE4-KRAS cells were treated with TRAIL and Smac mimic for 24 hours. Apoptotic cells (Annexin Vþ, PI) were counted. The data represent results
from 3 independent experiments. Averages and SD are shown.

Chemoprevention of Lung Cancer

www.aacrjournals.org Cancer Prev Res; 4(5) May 2011 669

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/cancerpreventionresearch/article-pdf/4/5/666/2337771/666.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
Black plate (670,1)

KRAS modulates the expression of TRAIL receptors
and Smac mimic overcomes the antiapoptotic activity
of XIAP to facilitate TRAIL-induced apoptosis
A surprising finding of our study was that RAc is not
required for TRAIL plus Smac mimic–induced apoptosis
in mutant KRAS cells, suggesting that KRAS may modulate
the expression of TRAIL receptors, as RAc does (28).
We tested this possibility by examining TRAIL receptor
expression by Western blotting. Expression of mutant
KRAS induced the expression of DR4 and DR5
(Fig. 4A). Mutant KRAS also inhibited the expression
DcR2 significantly (Fig. 4A). These results indicate that
expression of mutant KRAS enhances the DRs and
represses the DcRs of TRAIL in facilitating TRAIL signaling.
Mutant KRAS exerts an effect on TRAIL receptors
similar to that of RAc and thus eliminated the need for
adding RAc to TRAIL plus Smac mimic in inducing
apoptosis in mutant KRAS cells.
We next searched for the target of Smac mimic in
sensitizing mutant KRAS cells to TRAIL. We first analyzed
XIAP expression in mutant KRAS cells by Western blotting.
Although expression of XIAP was not affected significantly
by the mutant KRAS, we detected significantly
high levels of XIAP, suggesting that the antiapoptotic
activity of XIAP needs to be inhibited to facilitate TRAIL
signaling for apoptosis (Fig. 4B). To support this possibility,
we used XIAP-shRNA to inhibit the expression of
XIAP in mutant KRAS cells (Fig. 4B). Knockdown of XIAP
sensitized mutant KRAS cells to TRAIL-induced apoptosis
(Fig. 4C). As Smac mimic counters the activity of XIAP,
these results support the role of Smac mimic in targeting
the antiapoptotic activity of XIAP to facilitate TRAILinduced
apoptosis.

Short-term, intermittent TRAIL and Smac mimic
treatments strongly inhibit lung tumor growth in mice
As TRAIL plus Smac mimic induced apoptosis in oncogenic
KRAS–expressing cells in vitro, this combination has
the potential to achieve chemoprevention through shortterm
and intermittent therapy. We tested this potential of
TRAIL plus Smac mimic in vivo in a mouse model of
mutant KRAS (KRAS-G12D)–driven lung adenocarcinoma.
KRAS-G12D mice carry a conditional allele of
oncogenic KRAS-G12D (LSL-KRAS-G12D) and closely
mimic tumorigenesis initiated in human adults through
somatic KRAS mutations (34, 35). LSL-KRAS-G12D contains
a floxed transcriptional stop element, and infecting
the lungs of these mice with AdenoCre virus, a recombinant
adenovirus expressing the Cre recombinase, resulted
in the expression of mutant KRAS and the development of
epithelial hyperplasia of the bronchioles, adenomas, and
eventually pulmonary adenocarcinomas (34). Six weeks
after the induction of lung carcinogenesis in LSL-KRASG12D
via AdenoCre-activated KRAS-G12D expression,
the mice received 3 consecutive injections of TRAIL plus
Smac mimic within 1 week. The mice were sacrificed
3 days after the treatments, and the lungs were examined
for evidence of tumors by H&E staining. We used cleaved
caspase 3 immunohistochemistry staining to test for
apoptosis induction. TRAIL plus Smac mimic induced a
significant level of apoptosis in lung tumor cells (Fig. 5A).
There was no evidence of apoptosis in normal lung
sections (Fig. 5A). Treated mice had a significantly
decreased number of lung lesions (hyperplasias and adenomas;
versus control mice; Fig. 5B). The most dramatic
decrease was a 97% reduction in advanced lung lesions
(adenomas; Fig. 5B). Therefore, short-term treatment

Control
KRAS
DR4

A B C

DR5

DcR1

DcR2

Tubulin

XIAP

100

80

60

40

20
% Annexin V
0

+Pl− cells

Actin

TRAIL
XIAP-shRNA
K-Ras+
XIAP-shRNA
K-Ras+
XIAP-shRNA
XIAP-shRNA

Control
KRAS
KRAS +
XIAP-shRNA
XIAP-shRNA

Figure 4. Modulation of TRAIL-receptor expression by KRAS and role of XIAP in TRAIL plus Smac mimic–induced apoptosis in oncogenic KRAS–
expressing cells. A, effect of KRAS activation on the TRAIL receptors DR4, DR5, DcR1, and DcR2. HBE4 cells were infected with either control or
KRAS-expressing retrovirus. B, effect of XIAP knockdown. HBE4 cells were infected with either control or KRAS-expressing virus or were transfected with
XIAP-shRNA after KRAS infection. C, induction of apoptosis. HBE4 cells with various infection and transfection combinations were either treated with
TRAIL or not treated. Apoptotic cells (Annexin Vþ, PI) were counted. The data represent results from 3 independent experiments. Averages and SD
are shown.

Huang et al.

670 Cancer Prev Res; 4(5) May 2011 Cancer Prevention Research

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/cancerpreventionresearch/article-pdf/4/5/666/2337771/666.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
Black plate (671,1)

with TRAIL and Smac mimic inhibited in vivo lung tumor
growth.
To test the effect of intermittent TRAIL and Smac mimic
treatment, we treated the mice with 3 cycles of the 3-perweek
consecutive treatments within 2 months. The mice
were sacrificed 3 days after the last treatments, and the
lungs were examined for evidence of tumors by H&E
staining. At the time of analysis, most lesions in control
mice were adenomas, whereas most lesions in treated mice
were hyperplasias (Fig. 5C). A minor, but statistically significant,
reduction was observed in the total number of
lung lesions in the treatment group (versus controls;
Fig. 5D). More important, the number of advanced lesions
(adenomas) was greatly reduced in the treatment group
(versus controls; Fig. 5D). The lower number of total lung
lesions in Figure 5D than that in Figure 5B is likely due to
some adenomas, which were more numerous in Figure 5D,
comprising multiple hyperplastic lesions. These results
support the ability of TRAIL plus Smac mimic to induce
apoptosis in mutant KRAS cells in vivo and support the
potential of this combination for therapy-like chemoprevention
of human lung cancer.

Discussion

The concept of synthetic lethality originated in genetic
experiments in yeast and fruit flies. In synthetically lethal

gene pairs, a mutation of either gene alone is compatible
with viability but mutation of both genes causes death (36–
38). This concept has been applied in recent years in
developing cancer-specific cytotoxic agents (39, 40). Synthetic
lethality offers 2 advantages required for cancer
treatment and chemoprevention. First, a synthetic lethality
regimen has the ability to convert cytostatic targeting effects
(which mainly stop cell division) to cell death, which is far
less likely to result from directly targeting cancer-associated
single mutations than from targeting the interactions
between synthetic lethality mutations. Second, specific
cancer-associated synthetic lethality interactions are associated
with exquisite selectivity. This selectivity allows the
killing of cancer cells without harm to normal cells that lack
the cancer-specific mutation.
Our present results show for the first time a synthetic
lethal interaction among TRAIL, Smac, and constitutive
activation of RAS in premalignant bronchial epithelial cells
(Fig. 6). This interaction relied on the following effects of
RAS and Smac: RAS activates c-Myc and thus represses
c-FLIP expression and modulates the expression of TRAIL
receptors; and Smac overcomes the antiapoptotic effect of
XIAP. These interactions allowed TRAIL plus Smac (Smac
mimic) to kill KRAS-activated premalignant lung cells with
great efficiency and specificity. As mutational activation of
RAS occurs in approximately 30% of human cancers in
general and of NSCLC in particular, targeting oncogenic

Control
A B

C D

TRAIL + Smac

Control TRAIL + Smac

TRAIL +
Smac

Normal

Tumor

40
*

**

30

20

Lung lesion number 10
0
Total Adenoma

Control

TRAIL +
Smac

* ***
30

20

Lung lesion number 10
0
Total Adenoma

Control

Figure 5. Effect of TRAIL and Smac on KRAS-induced lung tumors in mice. A, TRAIL and Smac mimic induce apoptosis in lung tumors of LSL-KRASG12D
mice. LSL-KRAS-G12D mice were infected with AdenoCre and treated 6 weeks later with PBS (control; n ¼ 6) or received 3 consecutive treatments with
TRAIL (3 mg/kg) plus Smac mimic (3 mg/kg; n ¼ 6) within 1 week. Mice without infection were used as normal controls. Three days after the last treatment, the
lung sections were stained with an anti–cleaved caspase 3 antibody. Representative photomicrographs are shown. Caspase 3 staining was detected
only in TRAIL/Samc-mimic treated tumor samples. B, TRAIL and Smac mimic treatment inhibits lung tumor growth. Lung sections were stained with H&E and
lung lesions were counted. The data are derived from counting within serial sections in each mouse. Averages and SD are shown. *, P < 0.05; **, P < 0.001.
C, intermittent treatment with TRAIL plus Smac mimic inhibits adenoma formation. LSL-KRAS-G12D mice were infected with AdenoCre. Six weeks later,
the mice (n ¼ 6 for each treatment group) were subjected to 3 rounds of intermittent treatment in 2 months with either PBS (control) or TRAIL (3 mg/kg) plus
Smac mimic (1.5 mg/kg). Lung sections were stained with H&E; representative photomicrographs are shown. D, quantification of lung lesions. Serial
sections were stained with H&E, and lung lesions were counted. The data are derived from counting within serial sections in each mouse. Averages and SD are
shown. ***, P < 0.0001.

Chemoprevention of Lung Cancer

www.aacrjournals.org Cancer Prev Res; 4(5) May 2011 671

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/cancerpreventionresearch/article-pdf/4/5/666/2337771/666.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
Black plate (672,1)

RAS activation with the combination of TRAIL and Smac
mimic is a potential new approach for the chemoprevention
of NSCLC; this potential is supported by our present in
vivo animal results.
Traditional chemoprevention efforts have focused on
agents such as COX-2 inhibitors and dietary supplements,
which modulate tumorigenesis without substantially eliminating
premalignant cells. These agents have limited
effects on tumor progression and often require continuous
long-term application that raises the potential for unacceptable
side effects. Producing synthetic lethal interactions
by targeting tumor-specific gene mutations to eliminate
premalignant cells through apoptosis is a new strategy for
chemoprevention with the potential to overcome the 2
most pressing issues facing it today: effectiveness and
toxicity. It is arguable that apoptosis induction is the most
potent cellular anticancer mechanism and should be highly
effective for chemoprevention. The safety of the approach
in this study is achieved by the specificity that synthetic
lethal interactions allow in targeting altered cells. Furthermore,
therapy-like cancer prevention could be achieved by

short-term and noncontinuous treatments to further
reduce the potential side effects and costs often associated
with long-term cancer chemoprevention. Therapy-like chemoprevention
reflects a new direction for cancer prevention
research.
We recently showed the efficiency and efficacy of this
novel approach in colorectal carcinogenesis; TRAIL, RAc,
and APC signaling pathways had a synthetic lethal interaction
in inducing apoptosis in APC-deficient cells (28).
This work further validates the applicability of this new
approach to other oncogenic pathways and tumor types.
We have provided preclinical evidence that short-term,
intermittent TRAIL plus Smac mimic treatment is effective
in inducing significant apoptosis and reducing premalignant
lesions. These results support the use of TRAIL and
Smac mimic for lung cancer chemoprevention in a therapylike
fashion. This combination potentially targets the signaling
pathway leading to the activation of RAS, including
the activation of growth factor signaling such as overexpression
or mutational activation of the epidermal growth
factor receptor. The activation of growth factor/RAS signaling
pathways is frequently associated with various settings
of human carcinogenesis. Therefore, TRAIL and Smac
mimic could have chemopreventive potential against several
human cancers.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest

No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Acknowledgments

We thank Zhengming Xu for technical support, Dr. Reuben Lotan of
MD Anderson Cancer Center for the BW1799 cells, and Dr. Xiaodong
Wang at University of Texas Southwestern Medical Center for providing
Smac mimic. We also thank Dr. Mihai Gagea Iurascu of MD Anderson
Cancer Center for assistant in histologic analysis of lung lesions in mice.

Grant Support

This work was supported by NIH Grant AI063063 and institutional funds
from MD Anderson Cancer Center (to X. Wu).
The costs of publication of this article were defrayed in part by the
payment of page charges. This article must therefore be hereby marked
advertisement in accordance with 18 U.S.C. Section 1734 solely to indicate
this fact.

Received September 9, 2010; accepted October 15, 2010; published
online May 4, 2011.

References

1. Jemal A, Siegel R, Xu J, Ward E. Cancer Statistics, 2010. CA Cancer J
Clin 2010;60:277–300.
2. World Health Organization. Cancer. 2009. Available from: http://www.
who.int/mediacentre/factsheets/fs297/en/index.html.
3. Herbst RS, Heymach JV, Lippman SM. Lung cancer. N Engl J Med
2008;359:1367–80.
4. Tong L, Spitz MR, Fueger JJ, Amos CA. Lung carcinoma in former
smokers. Cancer 1996;78:1004–10.
5. Downward J. Signal transduction. New exchange, new target. Nature
1998;396:416–7.
6. Shields JM, Pruitt K, McFall A, Shaub A, Der CJ. Understanding
Ras: ‘it ain't over ‘til it's over’. Trends Cell Biol 2000;10:147–54.

7. Vojtek AB, Der CJ. Increasing complexity of the Ras signaling pathway.
J Biol Chem 1998;273:19925–8.
8. Bos JL. ras oncogenes in human cancer: a review. Cancer Res
1989;49:4682–9.
9. Forbes S, Clements J, Dawson E, Bamford S, Webb T, Dogan A, et al.
Cosmic 2005. Br J Cancer 2006;94:318–22.
10. Cooper CA, Carby FA, Bubb VJ, Lamb D, Kerr KM, Wyllie AH. The
pattern of K-ras mutation in pulmonary adenocarcinoma defines a
new pathway of tumour development in the human lung. J Pathol
1997;181:401–4.
11. Keith RL. Chemoprevention of lung cancer. Proc Am Thorac Soc
2009;6:187–93.

c-FLIP c-Myc

TRAIL

DR4/5 DcR1/2

FADD

Caspase 8

Caspase 3

Apoptosis

X

XIAP Smac

RAS

Raf

MEK

ERK/MAPK

PI3K

GSK-3 AKT

Growth factors

RAS

Figure 6. Synthetic lethal interaction among TRAIL, Smac, and RAS.
Activation of RAS by growth factors or mutations leads to the activation of
c-Myc through the activation of Raf, MEK, and Erk/MAPK and to the
inhibition of GSK-3 through the activation of PI3K and AKT. Activation of cMyc
represses the expression of c-FLIP. RAS also induces the expression
of DR4/5 and decreases the levels of DcR1/2. Smac inhibits the function of
XIAP. Thus, TRAIL and Smac specifically cause apoptosis in cells with
activated RAS.

Huang et al.

672 Cancer Prev Res; 4(5) May 2011 Cancer Prevention Research

