ORIGINAL PAPER Journal of Pathology
J Pathol 2011; 224: 564–574
Published online in Wiley Online Library
(wileyonlinelibrary.com) DOI: 10.1002/path.2925

PARP inhibition induces BAX/BAK-independent synthetic lethality
of BRCA1-deficient non-small cell lung cancer

Ian Paul,1 Kienan I Savage,1 Jaine K Blayney,2 Elisabeth Lamers,1 Kathy Gately,4 Keith Kerr,6 Michael Sheaff,5
Kenneth Arthur,3 Derek J Richard,7 Peter W Hamilton,1 Jacqueline A James,1 Kenneth J O’Byrne,2 D Paul Harkin,1
Jennifer E Quinn1* and Dean A Fennell1,2*
1 Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, Queen’s University Belfast, UK 2 Centre for Biomedical Informatics, Queen’s University Belfast, UK
3 Tissue Core Technology Unit, Queen’s University Belfast, UK
4 Thoracic Oncology Research Group, St James’ Hospital, Dublin, Ireland 5 Department of Pathology, Barts and the London NHS Trust, London, UK
6 Department of Pathology, University of Aberdeen, UK
7 Institute of Health and Biomedical Innovation, Queensland University of Technology, Brisbane, Australia

*Correspondence to: Dean A Fennell and Jennifer E. Quinn, Queens University Belfast, Centre for Cancer Research and Cell Biology, 97 Lisburn
Road, Belfast BT9 7BL, Northern Ireland, UK. e-mail: d.fennell@qub.ac.uk; j.e.quinn@qub.ac.uk

Abstract

Evasion of apoptosis contributes to both tumourigenesis and drug resistance in non-small cell lung carcinoma
(NSCLC). The pro-apoptotic BCL-2 family proteins BAX and BAK are critical regulators of mitochondrial
apoptosis. New strategies for targeting NSCLC in a mitochondria-independent manner should bypass this common
mechanism of apoptosis block. BRCA1 mutation frequency in lung cancer is low; however, decreased BRCA1
mRNA and protein expression levels have been reported in a significant proportion of lung adenocarcinomas.
BRCA1 mutation/deficiency confers a defect in homologous recombination DNA repair that has been exploited by
synthetic lethality through inhibition of PARP (PARPi) in breast and ovarian cells; however, it is not known whether
this same synthetic lethal mechanism exists in NSCLC cells. Additionally, it is unknown whether the mitochondrial
apoptotic pathway is required for BRCA1/PARPi-mediated synthetic lethality. Here we demonstrate that silencing
of BRCA1 expression by RNA interference sensitizes NSCLC cells to PARP inhibition. Importantly, this sensitivity
was not attenuated in cells harbouring mitochondrial apoptosis block induced by co-depletion of BAX and BAK.
Furthermore, we demonstrate that BRCA1 inhibition cannot override platinum resistance, which is often mediated
by loss of mitochondrial apoptosis signalling, but can still sensitize to PARP inhibition. Finally we demonstrate
the existence of a BRCA1-deficient subgroup (11–19%) of NSCLC patients by analysing BRCA1 protein levels
using immunohistochemistry in two independent primary NSCLC cohorts. Taken together, the existence of
BRCA1-immunodeficient NSCLC suggests that this molecular subgroup could be effectively targeted by PARP
inhibitors in the clinic and that PARP inhibitors could be used for the treatment of BRCA1-immunodeficient,
platinum-resistant tumours.
Copyright  2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd.

Keywords: apoptosis; BAX; BAK; non-small cell lung cancer; BRCA1; predictive biomarker; PARP inhibitor; synthetic lethality

Received 16 March 2011; Revised 7 April 2011; Accepted 13 April 2011

Disclosure of potential conflicts of interest. DP Harkin holds stock in, and is president of, Almac Diagnostics, Craigavon, UK. P Hamilton is founder
and shareholder of i-Path Diagnostics Ltd, Belfast, UK. All other authors of this manuscript have no conflicts of interest to declare.

Introduction

Synthetic lethality represents a novel therapeutic strategy
in the treatment of cancer, as exemplified by
the recent advent of poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase
(PARP) inhibition in BRCA1 /2-mutated tumours. Inhibition
of PARP, a single-strand (ssDNA) break-repair
protein, leads to an accumulation of DNA doublestrand
breaks, specifically in S-phase cells. Normally
these breaks are repaired via homologous recombination
(HR), a process requiring functional BRCA1 /2
[1]. However, the dual loss of both PARP-mediated

ssDNA repair upon PARP inhibition and defective
HR, in BRCA-deficient cells, results in the accumulation
of DNA damage and ultimately cell death [2–4].
Currently it is unknown whether synthetic lethality
due to inhibition of PARP-mediated DNA repair in
HR-defective tumours requires mitochondrial apoptosis.
The underlying mechanisms involved in cell
killing, involving the accumulation of catastrophic
DNA damage, would be predicted to induce cell death
independently of the canonical mitochondrial death
pathway. However, this hypothesis has not yet been
fully investigated.

Copyright  2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. J Pathol 2011; 224: 564–574
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. www.pathsoc.org.uk www.thejournalofpathology.com
Synthetic lethal targeting of BRCA1-negative non-small cell lung cancer 565

In contrast to breast and ovarian cancer, the mutation
frequency of BRCA1 in non-small cell lung cancer
(NSCLC) is low [5]. However, reduced BRCA1 mRNA
and protein expression levels have been reported in
both sporadic breast and ovarian cancer, indicating
that these tumours may exhibit a ‘BRCAness’ phenotype
[6]. Similarly, reduced BRCA1 mRNA and protein
expression levels are observed in up to 44% of NSCLC
adenocarcinomas through a number of mechanisms,
such as promoter hypermethylation, and altered mechanisms
of transcriptional regulation, such as hypoxiainduced
E2F-mediated BRCA1 repression [7–9].
Taron and colleagues [10] were the first to report that
NSCLC patients with reduced BRCA1 mRNA expression
levels derived a significantly greater overall survival
benefit following platinum-based chemotherapy
in comparison to patients with high BRCA1. Similarly,
low levels of BRCA1 mRNA expression were correlated
with prolonged survival in ovarian cancer [11].
Indeed, the correlation between BRCA1 mRNA expression
and clinical benefit following platinum chemotherapy
in these retrospective studies has underpinned
attempts to customize chemotherapy in NSCLC based
on BRCA1 mRNA expression levels [12,13].
More recently, absent/low BRCA1 protein expression,
measured by immunohistochemistry, has been
reported to predict for clinical outcome following
chemotherapy in patients with ovarian cancer [14]. In
support of this, multiple in vitro studies provide evidence
that BRCA1-deficient breast and ovarian cancer
cells lines display enhanced sensitivity to platinum
agents [11,15]. Currently, there is also significant preclinical
evidence to suggest that BRCA1-deficiency
results in enhanced response to PARP inhibitors, such
as olaparib [2,3,16]. A recent phase I clinical trial
has reported significant anti-tumour activity in BRCA1
germline mutation carriers following treatment with
PARP inhibitor [4]. Phase II studies have provided positive
proof of concept of the efficacy and tolerability
of olaparib in BRCA-mutated advanced ovarian cancer
and BRCA1 /BRCA2-mutated breast cancer [17,18].
The preclinical efficacy of PARP inhibitors in NSCLC
has yet to be investigated.
Defects in apoptosis underpin drug resistance and
is a hallmark of cancer [19,20]. Mitochondria are
key regulators of apoptosis, with the multidomain
proapoptotic BCL2 family members, BAX and BAK,
being essential for the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway
to function. Knockout of BAX and BAK results in
multidrug resistance, highlighting their essential role
in apoptosis [21]. Of significance, the pro-survival
proteins BCl-X and MCL-1 are amongst the most
commonly amplified in the cancer genome and provide
another mechanism through which tumours can acquire
defects in apoptosis [22].
Overcoming resistance to chemotherapy in NSCLC
is one of the major issues in the management of
NSCLC patients. Therefore, developing therapeutic

strategies that bypass the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway
could help to overcome drug resistance, representing
a major advance in lung cancer therapy.
In the current study, we demonstrate that BRCA1-
silencing in NSCLC cells results in synthetic lethality
following treatment with the PARP inhibitor, olaparib.
We also demonstrate that this mode of cell death is
independent of the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway.
Additionally, we demonstrate that siRNA-mediated
depletion of BRCA1 in platinum-resistant NSCLC cell
lines results in enhanced sensitivity to PARP inhibition.
Finally, we identify a significant subgroup of BRCA1-
immunodeficient NSCLC patients who display reduced
or absent BRCA1 protein expression.

Materials and methods

Cell culture

ATCC NCI-H1975 and NCI-H460 NSCLC cells were
grown in Roswell Park Memorial Institute (RPMI)
1640 medium supplemented with 10% fetal bovine
serum (FBS) and 50 µg/ml penicillin–streptomycin
(Life Technology Inc). NCI-H157 NSCLC cells were
maintained in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium
(DMEM) supplemented with 10% FBS, 1 mM sodium
pyruvate and 50 µg/ml penicillin–streptomycin. All
cell lines were maintained in a 5% CO2 incubator at
37 ◦
C.

Generation of BAX- and BAK-silenced NSCLC cell
lines
Plasmids encoding shRNA sequences to BAX, BAK
and non-targeting (NT) shRNA (SA Biosciences) were
transfected into H460 NSCLC cells, using FuGene
6 reagent (Roche) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. BAX plasmids with G418 antibiotic resistance
selection marker, BAK plasmids with puromycin
antibiotic resistance selection marker and separate NT
plasmids bearing either G418 or puromycin antibiotic
resistance selection markers were used. The
cells were transfected in six-well plates and incubated
with either 0.4 mg/ml G418 (Sigma Aldrich)
or 2 µg/ml puromycin (Calbiochem). Discrete colonies
were selected and screened by western blotting. Cells
stably expressing shRNA targeting BAX were then
retransfected with shRNA, targeting BAK to generate
clones expressing stable knockdown of both BAX
and BAK.

siRNA transfections

Cells were reversely transfected with 15 nM of either a
BRCA1-siRNA oligonucleotide sequence or a scrambled
control siRNA. All siRNA transfections were performed
using Lipofectamine RNAi Max reagent (Invitrogen)
according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
Two independent BRCA1 siRNA oligonucleotides

Copyright  2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. J Pathol 2011; 224: 564–574
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. www.pathsoc.org.uk www.thejournalofpathology.com

 10969896, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2925 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [02/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
566 I Paul et al

were used in all experiments. BRCA1-siRNA1, as previously
published [23] and BRCA1-siRNA2 were purchased
from Qiagen (BRCA1_15). Clonogenic assays
and western blotting were then performed as described
below.

BRCA1 over-expression

A549 cells were transfected with a flag-tagged BRCA1
construct (Fl4-BRCA1), a kind gift from Dr Richard
Baer, Institute for Cancer Genetics and Department of
Pathology, Columbia University, using electroporation
with the Nucleofector Kit T (Amaxa Biosystems,
MD, USA) according to the manufacturer’s protocol.
Clonogenic assays and western blotting were then
performed as described below.

Western blotting

H157, H460 or H1975 cells were scraped into medium
and pelleted by centrifugation at 1500 rcf relative
centrifugal force at 4 ◦
C for 5 min. Whole-cell lysates
were obtained by snap-freezing cells in RIPA lysis
buffer [50 mM Tris, pH 7.4, 150 mM NaCl, 5 mM
EDTA, 1% Triton X, 0.1% SDS and 1 mini-complete
protease inhibitor tablet/10 ml (Roche Diagnostics,
Indianapolis, IN, USA)]. Cell or mitochondrial lysate
(25 µg) was loaded and resolved by SDS–PAGE gel,
as previously described [24]. The primary antibodies
used were: anti-BRCA1 AB-1 (MS110; Calbiochem);
anti-α tubulin (Abcam, Cambridge, MA, USA); antiSMAC
and anti-cytochrome c (Calbiochem); and
anti-BAX, anti-BAK, anti-cleaved caspase-9 (Cell Signalling
Technology, Danvers, MA, USA). The secondary
antibodies used were goat anti-mouse HRP
(DAKO P0447) and goat anti-rabbit HRP (DAKO
P0448).

Mitochondrial isolation

Mitochondria were isolated from H460 stably expressing
shRNA to BAX and BAK and treated with peptides
indicated in the text, as described previously [24].

Caspase 3/7 activity assay

The Caspase-Glo 3/7 assay was obtained from Promega
(Southampton, UK) and was performed according to
the manufacturer’s instructions.

Clonogenic assays

Transiently transfected H460, H1975 and H157 cells
were trypsinized 48 h post-transfection and seeded in
six-well plates at a density of 2000 cells/well. Following
transfection with either BRCA1 or scrambledcontrol
siRNA oligonucleotides, cells plates were
treated 24 h later with serial concentrations of the commercially
available PARP inhibitor Olaparib-AZD2281
(Axon Medchem). The cells were allowed to grow for
approximately 8–10 days.

DNA damage repair assays
Cells transfected with control and BRCA1 siRNAs
were plated onto glass coverslips 48 h post-transfection
and allowed to attach for 24 h. The cells were then
treated with 1 µM PARPi (Olaparib-AZD2281) for
12 h. Following the removal of PARPi, the cells were
washed thoroughly in fresh medium and allowed to
recover in fresh medium for 12 h to allow DNA repair
to occur. The cells were fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde/PBS
and then permeabilized in 0.2% Triton
X-100/PBS, then blocked in 3% BSA/PBS and stained
with α-γ-H2AX (Millipore 05–636) diluted 1 : 10 000
in 3% BSA/PBS. Following several PBS washes,
the cells were stained with anti-mouse AlexaFluor
486 (Invitrogen). Coverslips were then mounted with
Vectashield containing DAPI (Vector Labs) and the
γ-H2AX foci were counted and imaged using an epifluorescence
microscope.

Flow cytometry
Cells were seeded 48 h post-transfection with siRNA,
as described, at a density of 1 × 105 cells/well in
six-well plates. The cells were treated after 24 h
and allowed to grow for a further 48 h. Following
treatment with cisplatin, DNA content was evaluated
by propidium iodide staining of the cells, using a
FacScaliber Flow Cytometer (Becton Dickinson), in the
FL-2 channel to determine the percentage of cells with
DNA content < 2 N.

Tumour samples
BRCA1 protein expression levels on human tissues
were assessed using immunohistochemistry (IHC).
Two tissue microarrays (TMAs) were constructed,
consisting of two independent cohorts of surgicallyresected
primary NSCLC tissue blocks with associated
pathological evaluation and clinical follow-up. A total
of 302 tumours were examined, with 113 tumours on
the Belfast TMA and 189 tumours on the Dublin TMA.
Appropriate ethical approval was obtained from the
local research ethics committees to carry out this work.

BRCA1 immunohistochemistry (IHC)
TMA sections were deparaffinized by sequential incubations
in xylene, followed by rehydration in ethanol.
Endogenous peroxidise activity was blocked by incubating
with 3% hydrogen peroxide solution for 10 min.
Antigen retrieval was achieved by incubating with
TRIS–EDTA buffer, pH 9.0, in a pressure cooker
for 3 min at full steam. The slides were washed,
followed by application of the primary antibody,
BRCA1 Ab-1 (MS110; Calbiochem) at a 1 : 200 dilution
in TRIS-buffered saline (TBS), pH 7.4, and
incubation overnight at 4 ◦
C. This clone has been
reported previously to be highly sensitive and specific
for the detection of BRCA1 in FFPE tissue using
IHC [25,26]. Following TBS washes, an anti-mouse
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibody

Copyright  2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. J Pathol 2011; 224: 564–574
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. www.pathsoc.org.uk www.thejournalofpathology.com

 10969896, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2925 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [02/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Synthetic lethal targeting of BRCA1-negative non-small cell lung cancer 567

was applied (DAKO EnVision HRP labelled polymer)
for 30 min. The sections were washed in TBS and
3,3-diaminobenzidine
(DAKO), applied to detect primary
antibody binding. The reaction was observed until
stained to satisfaction and the slides were washed using
distilled water. The slides were counterstained with
Mayer’s haematoxylin for 30 s, then ammonia water,
before serial incubations in ethanol and xylene. All
BRCA1 immunohistochemistry was performed within
the Tissue Core Technology Unit at the Centre for Cancer
Research and Cell Biology at Queen’s University
Belfast.

BRCA1 scoring
The BRCA1 IHC scoring of TMA slides was carried
out using the PathXL TMA Toolbox (i-Path
Diagnostics, UK), where pathologists could remotely
access on-line, high-resolution whole-slide scans of
the TMA, step through each core and keep track of
progress using TMA navigation software, and visually
score tissue IHC positivity using an on-screen interface,
where these were stored centrally for review and
analysis. Scoring of each TMA core was performed
independently by two lung pathologists. BRCA1 scoring
was determined using a binary approach and
based on two previous reports [14,27]. Specifically,
BRCA1-immunodeficent NSCLC tumours were classified
as demonstrating either absent or very low
levels of BRCA1 expression, with < 10% of cells
exhibiting nuclear BRCA1 staining. However, BRCA1-
immunopositive tumours were defined as those demonstrating
> 20% of cells with nuclear staining. Only
when the pathologists reached a consensus on IHC
scores were they used. Where a consensus agreement
could not be reached, patients were labelled ‘no consensus’.BRCA1
IHC scores were combined with associated
clinicopathological and survival data for further
analysis. Progression-free survival analysis was carried
out using Kaplan–Meier/log-rank test pairwise
comparison testing; p < 0.05 was deemed significant.
Statistical analysis GraphPad Prism version 5.00
for Windows (GraphPad Software, San Diego, CA,
USA; www.graphpad.com) was used for all statistical
analyses.

Results

PARP inhibition mediates synthetic lethality
in BRCA1-silenced NSCLC
Previous preclinical reports have indicated that reduced
BRCA1 expression confers sensitivity to cisplatin and
other DNA-damaging agents [15]. We therefore investigated
whether siRNA-mediated depletion of BRCA1
conferred a similar phenotype in NSCLC cell lines.
Accordingly, we confirmed abrogation of BRCA1
expression using siRNA and correlated this with a significant
increase in cisplatin-induced apoptosis in both

the H460 (SC 9.2%, siBRCA1 17.6%) and H157 (SC
2.6%, siBRCA1 6.9%) NSCLC cell lines (Figure 1A).
We then proceeded to correlate BRCA1 expression
with response to PARP inhibition, using clonogenic
assays. Subsequently, siRNA-mediated inhibition of
BRCA1 was confirmed and resulted in a significant
reduction in colony formation following serial treatments
with PARP inhibitor, as compared to scrambled
control cells, in all three NSCLC cell lines (Figure 1B).
Specifically, H157 NSCLC cells demonstrated almost
a log-fold reduction in IC50 following BRCA1-siRNA
silencing (SC 2.07 µM versus BRCA1 0.227 µM). In
addition, H1975 cells demonstrated a seven-fold reduction
in IC50 following BRCA1-siRNA (SC 1.39 µM
versus BRCA1 0.193 µM) and H460 cells demonstrated
a four-fold reduction in IC50 following BRCA1
silencing (SC 1.06 µM versus BRCA1 0.25 µM), as
shown in Figure 1B(i–iii).
In breast cancer cells, synthetic lethality of PARP
inhibition (PARPi) with BRCA1 deficiency is due to
the combined defect in ssDNA repair and HR-mediated
DNA repair, leading to the accumulation of DNA
damage. In order to determine whether PARP inhibitormediated
death is associated with defective DNA repair
in NSCLC cells, we examined DNA repair efficiency
by monitoring the presence of DNA damage-induced,
γ-H2AX foci generated in response to PARP inhibition
and 12 h after the removal of PARPi. DNA damage was
assessed by counting γ-H2AX foci, which are wellcharacterized
markers of DNA double-strand breaks
[28]. PARP inhibition induced DNA damage equally
in both control and BRCA1-siRNA transfected cells in
both the H460 and H157 NSCLC cell lines (Figure 2A,
B). In contrast, 12 h after the removal of PARPi,
approximately 70% of BRCA1-depleted cells retained
unrepaired DNA damage, in comparison to control
cells, 90% of which had repaired PARPi-induced DNA
damage (Figure 2A–D). This suggests that BRCA1-
siRNA-depleted NSCLC cells are unable to repair
PARPi-mediated DNA damage and likely die due to
the accumulation of DNA damage.
Following the observed effect of siRNA-mediated
BRCA1 depletion and response to PARPi in NSCLC
cell lines, we subsequently performed a rescue strategy
using the A549 NSCLC cell line, which expresses relatively
low levels of BRCA1. Transient over-expression
of BRCA1 in A549 cells resulted in a reduction in
response to PARPi as measured by clonogenic assay.
Following treatment with an IC50 dose of PARPi, A549
cells over-expressing BRCA1 exhibited a statistically
significant increase (p = 0.029) in the cellular surviving
fraction (71.2%) as compared to empty vector
control transfected cells (47.8%) (data not shown).

Co-silencing of BAX/BAK results in mitochondrial
apoptosis block
We then proceeded to examine whether mitochondrial
apoptotic signalling was required for PARPi-induced
synthetic lethality in BRCA1-siRNA-silenced NSCLC

Copyright  2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. J Pathol 2011; 224: 564–574
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. www.pathsoc.org.uk www.thejournalofpathology.com

 10969896, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2925 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [02/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
568 I Paul et al

Figure 1. BRCA1 silencing confers sensitivity to cisplatin and synthetic lethality following inhibition of PARP. (A) (left) western blot
demonstrating siRNA mediated silencing of BRCA1 in H460 and H157 NSCLC cells, 48 h following transfection with scrambled (SC) or
BRCA1 (siBRCA1) targeted siRNA; (right) apoptotic cells, indicated by sub-G0/G1 fraction, as assessed by flow cytometry of PI-stained H460
and H157 cells, transfected as above, following 48 h treatment with 10 µM cisplatin. (B) siRNA-mediated silencing of BRCA1 confers
sensitivity to PARP inhibition, resulting in a marked reduction in colony formation in H1975, H157 and H460 NSCLC cell lines. Clonogenic
survival curves of H1975, H157 and H460 NSCLC cells transfected with scrambled (SC) or BRCA1 (siBRCA1) targeted siRNA after 8–10 days
of continuous exposure to PARP inhibitor.

cells. In order to do this, we stably transfected H460
cells with short hairpin RNAs (shRNAs) simultaneously
targeting both BAX and BAK (H460shBAX/BAK)
proteins, which are required for mitochondrial apoptotic
signalling. Six clones were generated (sh-BAX/
BAK1A–C and sh-BAX/BAK4A, C and F), expressing
differing short hairpin RNA sequences targeting
BAX and BAK, compared to control cells expressing
two non-targeting shRNAs (sh-NTNT) (Figure 3A).
Several tests were performed to confirm the functionality
of the mitochondrial apoptotic block in
shBAX/BAK cells. Treatment with staurosporine

induced strong accumulation of cleaved caspase 9
(p37) in the sh-NTNT clones, but no cleaved caspase 9
appeared in the sh-BAX/BAK clones (Figure 3B). The
sh-BAX/BAK clones also exhibited resistance to proapoptotic
peptides corresponding to the BH3 domain of
the pro-apoptotic protein BID (BH3BID). Isolated mitochondria
from shBAX/BAK clones demonstrated the
expected failure to release cytochrome c and SMAC
into the supernatant fraction following incubation with
BH3BID (Figure 3C). Finally, we confirmed the functionality
of the sh-BAX/BAK cells by demonstrating
significant attenuation in caspase-3 activity in response

Copyright  2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. J Pathol 2011; 224: 564–574
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. www.pathsoc.org.uk www.thejournalofpathology.com

 10969896, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2925 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [02/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Synthetic lethal targeting of BRCA1-negative non-small cell lung cancer 569

Figure 2. BRCA1 silencing leads to accumulation of PARPi-induced DNA damage. H460 (A) and H157 (B) cells were treated with vehicle
(Untr) or 1 µM PARP inhibitor (PARPi) for 12 h to induce DNA damage. PARPi was then removed and the cells were fixed at 0 and 12 h
following recovery. DNA damage was assessed by γ-H2AX staining and cells containing more than five DNA damage foci were scored.
(C) Representative images of H460 cells stained with γ-H2AX, indicating DNA damage foci remaining 12 h after removal of PARPi inhibitor.
(D) Representative images of H157 cells stained with γ-H2AX, indicating DNA damage foci remaining 12 h after removal of PARPi inhibitor.

to treatment with R8BID, as compared to sh-NTNT
cells (Figure 3D).

PARPi-induced synthetic lethality in BRCA1 NSCLC
cells occurs independently of BAX/BAK-mediated
mitochondrial apoptosis
Despite the presence of mitochondrial apoptosis
block in H460 sh-BAX/BAK clones, siRNA-mediated
inhibition of BRCA1 followed by PARP inhibition
significantly reduced colony formation compared to
scrambled control cells in all three H460 stably transfected
clones, sh-NTNT (IC50: SC, 1.55 µM; BRCA1,
0.33 µM), sh-BAX/BAK1C (IC50: SC, 1.68 µM;
BRCA1, 0.37 µM) and sh-BAX/BAK4F (IC50: SC,
1.32 µM; BRCA1, 0.19 µM). These results indicate
that PARPi-induced synthetic lethality in BRCA1-
siRNA-depleted NSCLC cell line models is independent
of mitochondrial apoptosis signalling
(Figure 4A–D).

PARP inhibitor-induced synthetic lethality bypasses
cisplatin resistance

Cisplatin resistance is a major problem in the clinic
and is associated with alterations in DNA repair and
a block of downstream mitochondrial apoptosis signalling
[24,29]. However, due to the finding that
BRCA1 silencing-mediated PARPi sensitivity appears
to be independent of the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway,
we hypothesized that PARPi synthetic lethality
would remain functional in cisplatin-resistant cells.
We therefore explored whether NSCLC cells selected
for cisplatin resistance, and harbouring defective mitochondrial
signalling, would exhibit cross-resistance to
PARP inhibitor-induced synthetic lethality mediated by
BRCA1 silencing [24]. Cisplatin-resistant cells were
derived from H460 cells as described previously [24]
and were used to address this hypothesis.
We confirmed that siRNA-mediated BRCA1 silencing
resulted in sensitization of parental H460 cells

Copyright  2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. J Pathol 2011; 224: 564–574
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. www.pathsoc.org.uk www.thejournalofpathology.com

 10969896, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2925 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [02/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
570 I Paul et al

Figure 3. Mitochondrial apoptosis block induced by simultaneous
silencing of BAX and BAK. (A) Western blot showing the relative
levels of BAX and BAK expression in H460 cells stably expressing
targeted shRNAs (sh-BAX/BAK) versus non-targeted control shRNAs
(NTNT). (B) Western blot for cleaved caspase 9 in sh-NTNT and
sh-BAX/BAK clones following 24 h treatment with 100 nM and
250 nM staurosporine. Caspase 9 cleavage occurs in sh-NTNT
but not sh-BAX/BAK clones. (C) Western blot showing SMAC and
cytochrome c content in the isolated mitochondrial fraction and
supernatant following incubation with 30 µM BH3BID for 30 min
in H460 sh-BAX/BAK clones compared to non-targeting control
(sh-NTNT). SMAC and cytochrome c is not released in response to
BH3BID in sh-BAX/BAK clones, indicating failure of mitochondrial
outer membrane permeabilization (MOMP). (D) Luminescent DEVDase
assay measures caspase-3-like activity in sh-NTNT and shBAX/BAK
cells 24 h after R8BID treatment, shown relative to
time-matched control for each cell line. The increase in Casp3
activity in the NTNT control is attenuated in sh-BAX/BAK cells.

to platinum, as expected. However, BRCA1 silencing
failed to induce sensitivity to platinum in the resistant
H460CISPR cells, as measured by the degree
of apoptosis [sub-G0/G1 population; Figure 5A(ii)]. In
contrast, siRNA-mediated inhibition of BRCA1 in the
H460CISPR cells resulted in significant sensitization
following PARP inhibition, similar to that observed for
the parental H460 cells (siBRCA1–H460CISPR PARPi
IC50 = 0.63 µM: siBRCA1–H460 PAR PARP IC50 =
0.25 µM) [Figure 5A(iii)]. Taken together, these data
demonstrate that siRNA-mediated abrogation of
BRCA1 expression does not restore platinum sensitivity

to platinum-resistant cells but does result in enhanced
response sensitization to PARP inhibition.

A significant proportion of primary NSCLCs are
BRCA1-immunodeficient
Our current in vitro data indicate that BRCA1-deficient
NSCLC cell line models are highly sensitive to
the PARP inhibitor olaparib. In addition, BRCA1-
mutated breast cancer patients are reported to respond
well to treatment with PARP inhibitors [2–4]. Taken
together, these data suggest that BRCA1-deficient
NSCLC patients may also derive benefit from PARP
inhibitor therapy. Currently, there is evidence of the
existence of a subgroup of NSCLC patients with
reduced BRCA1 mRNA expression levels who benefit
from platinum-based chemotherapy [10]. However,
there is currently no method routinely used in the
clinic for identifying this subgroup of BRCA1-deficient
NSCLC patients.
We therefore set out to independently verify this subgroup
of NSCLC patients in two separate cohorts, using
an IHC-based approach. BRCA1 IHC was conducted
on two independent TMAs representing two independent
cohorts of primary NSCLC patients. The Belfast
cohort represented 113 patients and the Dublin cohort
represented 189 patients.
In the Dublin cohort, 19% of primary NSCLC
specimens were scored as BRCA1-immunodeficient,
whereas in the Belfast cohort 11% of patients were
scored as BRCA1-immunodeficient (Figure 5B, C). In
both cohorts, BRCA1-immunodeficiency occurred in
both squamous and non-squamous NSCLC. Combining
data from both cohorts, BRCA1-immunodeficiency
was relatively more frequent in non-squamous tumours,
with 26.2% of these tumours classified as BRCA1-
immunodeficient compared to only 8.7% of squamous
tumours. (Table 1). Loss of BRCA1 expression was not
found to be prognostically significant based on analysis
of progression-free survival data (not shown).

Discussion

Non-small cell lung cancer is the most prevalent malignancy
worldwide and is associated with 27% of cancer
deaths in the UK. The rapid lethality of NSCLC is associated
with significant de novo drug resistance, which
has accounted for a therapeutic plateau over the last
few decades [30]. In recent years, our understanding
of how to treat NSCLC has undergone a paradigm
shift, initiated by the identification of somatic activating
mutations in the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR) [31,32]. Similarly, ELK4–ALK translocation
[33] is associated with extreme preclinical sensitivity
to respective ALK kinase inhibition in both preclinical
and clinical settings. Additional molecular subclasses
with associated somatic gene alterations have
been discovered, predominantly in lung adenocarcinomas,
and include mutations of BRAF [34], HER2

Copyright  2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. J Pathol 2011; 224: 564–574
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. www.pathsoc.org.uk www.thejournalofpathology.com

 10969896, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2925 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [02/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Synthetic lethal targeting of BRCA1-negative non-small cell lung cancer 571

Figure 4. Synthetic lethal killing bypasses the mitochondrial apoptosis block induced by BAX and BAK silencing. (A) Western blot showing
siRNA-mediated silencing of BRCA1 in BAX/BAK-silenced H460 cells. Cells were transfected for 48 h with the indicated siRNA. (B–D)
Clonogenic dose response assays for shNTNT, shBAXBAK 1C and shBAXBAK 4F cells transfected with control (SC) and BRCA1 targeting
siRNAs (siBRCA1). PARP inhibition induces an equivalent degree of synthetic lethality, measured by clonogeneic survival, in BRCA1-silenced
BAX/BAK-depleted cells in comparison to NTNT control cells.

[35] and PIK3CA [36]. Continued identification of new
molecular subclasses within NSCLC is paramount in
improving the effectiveness of treatment of this disease.
Apoptosis block contributes to drug resistance [19].
The BCL-2 family of proteins constitute key regulators
of mitochondrial apoptosis, with pro-apoptotic
versus pro-survival members engaged in a rheostat-like
functional interaction that regulates the propensity of
tumour cells to initiate mitochondrial outer membrane
permeabilization and apoptosis. The pro-survival proteins
BCL-X and MCL-1 represent two of the most
commonly amplified genes in the cancer genome [37].
Targeting the pro-survival members of the BCL-2 family
to derepress the pro-apoptotic machinery is one
strategy that has been investigated extensively over
several years, culminating in the discovery of bona fide
BH3 peptidomimetics, such as ABT-263 [38]. Identifying
efficient methods of overcoming mitochondrial
apoptosis block, eg by BH3 peptidomimetics, has been
an intensively researched therapeutic strategy that has
yet to become a mode of treatment. A complementary
strategy, however, could be to bypass the mitochondrial
apoptosis pathway altogether, using novel pharmacological
approaches.
We hypothesized that exploiting a synthetic lethal
strategy based on inhibition of PARP-mediated singlestranded
break repair in BRCA1-immunodeficient cells
[2,4] would lead to catastrophic DNA damage and
therefore render the mitochondrial apoptosis pathway
dispensible. In modelling ‘BRCAness’ by silencing
BRCA1 expression, we confirmed the expected sensitization
to PARP inhibition, as has been reported in
the context of BRCA1 mutation or loss of BRCA2
in breast cancer [2–4]. Silencing of BAX and BAK,
although capable of completely blocking the mitochondrial
apoptosis pathway, was unable to attenuate cell
killing induced by PARP inhibition in BRCA1-silenced
cells. This implies that the catastrophic levels of DNA
damage that result from a combined defect in ssDNA

repair and HR-mediated DSB repair is sufficient to kill
without recourse to mitochondrial apoptosis signalling.
Data from the Spanish Lung Cancer Group strongly
suggests that reduced BRCA1 mRNA expression levels
in NSCLC patients correlate with increased sensitivity
to cisplatin [10], as was originally hypothesized from
preclinical studies [11,15]. Accordingly, we were able
to demonstrate that silencing of BRCA1, using siRNA,
sensitizes cells to cisplatin. Additionally, NSCLC cells
selected for resistance to cisplatin have previously
been demonstrated to harbour defects in mitochondrial
apoptotic signalling [24]. Given that PARPi-induced
synthetic lethality in BRCA1-depleted NSCLC cells
appears to be independent of this pathway, we hypothesized
that BRCA1 depletion would still sensitize
cisplatin-resistant cells to PARP inhibitor. Accordingly,
selection for resistance to cisplatin did not prevent
PARP inhibitor-mediated synthetic lethality. BRCA1
levels in cisplatin-resistant cells were equal to those
in parental cells. Silencing of BRCA1 alone did not
restore sensitivity to these cells. Together with their
sensitivity to PARP inhibition following BRCA1 silencing,
this strongly suggests that DNA repair, associated
with H460-resistant cells, also utilizes the single-strand
break-repair pathway. This conserved reliance, as in
parental cells, can be exploited by PARP inhibition to
induce cell death. BRCA1 may therefore be a predictive
marker of response to PARP inhibition in platinumresistant
NSCLC. This provided a rationale for investigating
whether sporadic NSCLC with absent or low
levels of BRCA1 protein expression may represent an
important subgroup with a high likelihood of responding
to PARP inhibition.
Using a cohort of primary NSCLC specimens, we
have identified a molecular subset of non-small cell
lung cancers (NSCLCs) that are BRCA1-immunodeficient.
The exact mechanisms underlying BRCA1-
immunodeficiency in sporadic breast, ovarian and
prostate cancer and NSCLC remain unknown; however,

Copyright  2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. J Pathol 2011; 224: 564–574
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. www.pathsoc.org.uk www.thejournalofpathology.com

 10969896, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2925 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [02/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
572 I Paul et al

Figure 5. PARP inhibitor-induced synthetic lethality in BRCA1-silenced, platinum-resistant NSCLC cells. (A) (i) Western blot showing
siRNA-mediated silencing of BRCA1 in H460 parental (H460 PAR) and cisplatin-resistant (H460 CISPR) cells transfected with scrambled
(SC) or BRCA1 (siBRCA1)-targeted siRNA; (ii) apoptotic cells, indicated by sub-G0/G1 fraction as assessed by flow cytometry of PI-stained
H460 PAR and H460 CISPR cells, transfected as above, following 48 h treatment with 10 µM cisplatin. BRCA1 silencing confers
increased sensitivity to cisplatin-induced apoptosis in parental but not cisplatin-resistant cells; (iii) clonogenic dose– response assays
after siRNA-mediated silencing of BRCA1 in H460 PAR and CISPR cells. PARP inhibition induces an equivalent degree of synthetic
lethality in BRCA1-silenced H460 PAR (red) and H460 CISPR (blue) cells. (B) Representative images of BRCA1 immunohistochemistry,
demonstrating positive (left panel) versus negative cores (right panel) in a tissue microarray. (C) Pie-charts summarizing the comparative
BRCA1-immunodeficiency frequency in primary NSCLC specimens from the Belfast cohort (left) versus the Dublin cohort (right).

Copyright  2011 Pathological Society of Great Britain and Ireland. J Pathol 2011; 224: 564–574
Published by John Wiley & Sons, Ltd. www.pathsoc.org.uk www.thejournalofpathology.com

 10969896, 2011, 4, Downloaded from https://pathsocjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/path.2925 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [02/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
Synthetic lethal targeting of BRCA1-negative non-small cell lung cancer 573

Table 1. Distribution of BRCA1 immunostaining by NSCLC
histological subtype in both cohorts combined
Distribution by histology
Number (% of histological subtype)
Squamous Non-squamous
BRCA1-immunodeficient 15 (8.7) 34 (26.2)
No consensus 16 (9.3) 16 (12.3)
BRCA1-immunopositive 141 (82) 80 (61.5)
Total 172 (100) 130 (100)

epigenetic alterations, such as promoter methylation,
have been reported to be a potential mechanism [8].
In addition, interrogation of the tumorscape database
reveals loss of BRCA1 copy number as a significant
somatic event in NSCLC [39]. The BRCA1 mutation
frequency, on the other hand, as revealed by the
Cosmic database, is low at 0.3% [5]. Nonetheless,
BRCA1 IHC presents a robust, relatively simple and
cost-effective approach for identifying a subgroup of
BRCA1-immunodeficient NSCLC patients who may
derive benefit from treatment with PARP inhibitors.
This biomarker assay now merits testing in the clinical
trial setting.

