Abstract. Synthetic lethality is based on the incompatibility
of cell survival with the loss of function of two or more
genes, not with loss of function of a single gene. If targets of
synthetic lethality are deregulated or mutated in cancer cells,
the strategy of synthetic lethality can result in significant
increase of therapeutic efficacy and a favourable therapeutic
window. In this review, we discuss synthetic lethality based
on deficient DNA repair mechanisms, activating mutations of
RAS, loss of function mutations of the tumor suppressor
genes p53, Rb and von Hippel-Lindau, and disruption of
interactive protein kinase networks in the context of
development of new anticancer agents.

The most significant achievements in the development of
anticancer drugs are dependent on the understanding of the
biology of the disease (1). Especially promising are
approaches which focus on targets of tumor subtypes, in
contrast to their corresponding normal cells, with impact on
potential significant therapeutic benefit and a favourable
therapeutic window. A breakthrough in this context was the
discovery of imatinib (Gleevec), a kinase inhibitor of the
constitutively active fusion protein consisting of BCR and
ABL (BCR–ABL) for the treatment of chronic myeloid
leukemia (CML) (2). This concept was extended to the
treatment of non-small cell lung carcinoma (NSCLC)
expressing epidermal growth factor receptor (EGFR) with
EGFR inhibitors, gastrointestinal stromal tumor (GIST) with
tyrosine kinase KIT (CD117) inhibitors, melanomas with the
activating V600E B-rat fibrosarcoma (BRAF) mutation with

a kinase inhibitor and NSCLC patients with the echinoderm
microtubule-associated protein-like 4-anaplastic lymphoma
kinase (EML4–ALK) fusion protein with an ALK inhibitor
(3, 4). A promising concept of anticancer drug development is
based on synthetic lethality (SL), which arises when a
combination of inactivating mutations in two or more genes
results in cell death, whereas a mutation in one of the genes
does not (5). The concept was pioneered by screening
chemical libraries that specifically kill yeast deletion mutants
with defects in cell-cycle checkpoints or DNA repair (6, 7).
Many SL interactions have been identified by making use of
interference screens in mammalian and human cells (8-11).
Figure 1 describes the scenarios for discussed in this review.
The context can be a mutated oncogene (Figure 1A), a
mutated tumor suppressor gene (Figure 1B), an overexpressed
oncogene (Figure 1C), two genes as part of a protein kinase
network (Figure 1D), or genes belonging to the class of DNA
mismatch repair genes and a second gene involved in either
DNA repair or DNA synthesis (Figure 1E). Scenarios A and
C rely on loss of function in only one of the two involved
genes.

RAS-related SL

Ki-rat sarcoma gene (KRAS) is mutated in 30% of human
tumors with a prevalence of >90% in pancreatic
adenocarcinoma. Therefore, the identification of vulnerabilities
of human tumors expressing oncogenic Ki-RAS is an
important issue. Large-scale RNA interference (RNAi) screens
can be used for identification of such vulnerabilities. Cells that
are dependent on mutant Ki-RAS exhibit sensitivity to
suppression of the serine-threonine kinase 33 (STK33)
irrespective of tissue origin, whereas Ki-RAS independent
cells do not require STK33 (12). STK33 selectively promotes
viability in Ki-RAS dependent cells in a kinase-dependent
manner by suppression of mitochondrial apoptosis by p70
ribosomal protein S6 kinase 1 S6K (RPS6KB1)-induced

159

Correspondence to: Ulrich H. Weidle, Roche Diagnostics, Division
Pharma, Im Nonnenwald 2, D-82372 Penzberg, Germany. Tel: + 49
8856602801, e-mail: ulrich.weidle@roche.com

Key Words: DNA repair, oncogenes, poly(ADP) ribose polymerase,
protein kinase networks, tumor suppressor genes, review.

CANCER GENOMICS & PROTEOMICS 8: 159-172 (2011)

Review

Synthetic Lethality-based Targets for Discovery
of New Cancer Therapeutics

ULRICH H. WEIDLE1, DANIELA MAISEL1 and DIRK EICK2

1Roche Diagnostics, Division Pharma, Penzberg, Germany;
2Department of Epigenetics, Center for Integrated Protein Science Munich (CIPSM),
Helmholtz Center Munich, Munich, Germany

1109-6535/2011 $2.00+.40
inactivation of the proapoptotic BCL2- associated death
promoter (BAD) selectively in Ki-RAS-dependent cells.
Tumor cells with mutated NRAS or HRAS do not exhibit this
phenomenon. STK33 is not a component of the RAS signaling

pathway and does not serve as an oncogene on its own in
transformation assays. The lethal interaction between Ki-RAS
and STK33 is restricted to cells which are functionally
dependent on Ki-RAS, therefore it is important to identify

CANCER GENOMICS & PROTEOMICS 8: 159-172 (2011)

160

Figure 1. Scenarios for synthetic lethality. Possible molecular interactions leading to synthetic lethality are summarized: A: Activated oncogene and
inactivation of another gene, B: inactivated tumor suppressor gene and inactivation of another gene, C: overexpression of an oncogene and
inactivation of another gene, D: inactivation of two kinases as part of a signaling network, E: inactivation of a pair of DNA repair genes and DNA
synthesis-related/DNA repair genes. Red arrows indicate synthetic lethality.
characteristics which mediate the dependency of primary
tumors on Ki-RAS. For the development of anticancer agents
based on the lethal interaction between Ki-RAS and STK33,
the elucidation of the physiological role of STK33 is important
to define possible toxicity-related liabilities.
A genome-wide RNAi screen was performed to identify
genes whose inhibition results in reduced viability of Ki-RAS
mutant cells (13). The identified targets included cyclin A2
(CCNA2), kinesin-like protein 2C (KIF2C), polo-like kinase 1
(PLK1) and anaphase-promoting complex/cyclosome (APC/C),

indicating that Ki-RAS cells are vulnerable to mitotic
perturbations. As predicted from the RNAi analysis, Ki-RAS
mutant cells are preferentially killed by mitotic spindle function
targeting drugs such as paclitaxel, a PLK1 inhibitor and the
proteasome inhibitor bortezomib. Microarray analysis of lung
adenocarcinomas showed an inverse correlation between the
mitotic machinery genes with patient survival in a Ki-RAS
status-dependent manner. All of these proteins are required by
normal cells as well; therefore the difference between Ki-RAS
mutant cells and wild-type Ki-RAS is quantitative, not

Weidle et al: Synthetic Lethality-based Targets for Discovery of New Cancer Therapeutics (Review)

161

Figure 2. RAS-mediated synthetic lethality. The second row displays target molecules for Ha-RAS- and Ki-RAS-based synthetic lethality and the
third row shows the physiological consequences of the inhibition of the effector molecules or the pathway involved. APC: Anaphase-promoting
complex; BAX: BCL-2-mediated X protein; CDK4: cyclin-dependent kinase 4; JNK: jun N-terminal kinase; NFκB: nuclear factor κB; PKC α, β, γ:
protein kinase C α, β or γ; STK 33: serine/threonine kinase 33; TBK-1: TANK-binding kinase 1. Green boxes and brown boxes highlight the targets
involved in synthetic lethal partnerships and blue boxes indicate the mode of action (MOA) responsible for synthetic lethality.

Figure 3. p53 mutant- and Rb mutant-mediated synthetic lethality. The p53 and Rb mutants are all loss-of-function mutations. Target molecules for
synthetic lethality are shown in the second row and pathways or targets involved in synthetic lethality are shown in the third row. AMPK: AMPactivated
protein kinase; ATM: ataxia telangiectasia mutated; CHK1: checkpoint kinase 1; GEF-H1: guanine nucleotide exchange factor-H1; MAP4:
microtubule-associated protein 4; MK2: MAP-kinase activated protein kinase 2; MYT-1: dual-specificity kinase; PAK3: serine/threonine kinase;
PLK1: polo-kinase 1; SGK2: serine/threonine kinase; Skp2: S-phase kinase associated protein 2; Wee1: nuclear serine/threonine kinase 1. Red and
brown boxes highlight the partners involved in a synthetic lethal partnership and blue boxes refer to the MOA for synthetic lethality.
qualitative. Making use of RNAi screening in a cell panel
composed of wild-type and mutant Ki-RAS cells, TANKbinding
kinase (TBK1) was also identified as a synthetic lethal
gene (14). TBK1 is a non-canonical inhibitor of κB protein
(IκB) that is known to regulate nuclear factor κB (NFκB)
signaling. These results are based on screening immortalized
lung epithelial cells (mutant Ki-RAS versus control), 19 cancer
cell lines in the primary screen and 11 NSCLC cell lines in the
secondary screen, and were confirmed in xenografts in vivo: 2
Ki-RAS wild-type and 2 mutant Ki-RAS.
In a mouse model of NSCLC, an unexpected lethal
interaction between mutant Ki-RAS and cyclin-dependent
kinase (CDK) ablation was detected (15). Genetic ablation
of CDK4 (but not of CDK2 or CDK6) prevented
development of Ki-RAS-induced NSCLC development in
vivo. Mutant Ki-RAS was also induced in other tissues such
as pancreas and colon, but these tissues do not undergo
hyperplasia or develop tumors and senescence was not
induced in the absence of CDK4. The results indicate that
induction of senescence might be specific for proliferating
tissues and therefore might be selective for tumor cells. It
remains to be seen whether inhibition of CDK4 in NSCLC
with mutant Ki-RAS will translate into clinical benefit.
A synthetic lethal interaction between loss of protein kinase
Cδ (PKCδ) and mutated HRAS has been described (16) with
NIH3T3/Ha-RAS and DU145 prostate cancer cells as
experimental systems. During the apoptotic process, PKCα and
β are up-regulated and then associated with receptor of
activated protein kinase C1 (RACK1), an adaptor for activated
PKCδ and jun N-terminal kinase (JNK). Immunoblotting
revealed that JNK is phosphorylated, accompanied by caspase
8 cleavage. The inhibition of JNK abrogates this process
triggered by PKCδ knockdown. The data suggest that PKCα, β
and PKCδ function oppositely to maintain a balance supporting
Ha-RAS cells to survive. Selective killing of Ki-RAS mutated
colon cancer cells was reported (17). Ki-RAS mutated colon
cancer cells engineered to produce blue fluorescent protein
were co-cultured with a subclone in which the mutant Ki-RAS
allele was eliminated by homologous recombination and
engineered to produce yellow fluorescent protein. Several
chemical entities, among them a novel cytidine nucleotide,
were identified as selective killers of Ki-RAS mutant colon
cancer cells. A screen in isogenic HCT116 colon carcinoma
cells with a library targeting 2500 genes revealed that the
transcription factor SNAIL-2 is only required in RAS mutant
cells (18, 19). The SL interactions between mutated Ha-RAS,
Ki-RAS and other partners are summarized in Figure 2.

p53 and Rb-related SL

The corresponding lethal interactions are summarized in
Figure 3. Protein p53 (p53) is mutated in 50% of human
tumors, therefore SL in the context of p53 loss of function is

an important issue for future anticancer drug development.
However, one has to keep in mind that not all mutants result
in a complete loss of function phenotype (20-22). Original
attempts included screening of the 60 National Cancer
Institute (NCI) cancer cell lines for compounds which
selectively kill cells devoid of p53 (23). Few classes of
compounds were identified, including paclitaxel.
Subsequently, microtubule-associated protein-4 (MAP-4), a
p53 transcriptional repressed target, was identified as a
possible mediator of susceptibility to paclitaxel killing (24).
PLK1, a regulator of the G2/M checkpoint was identified as
consistently upregulated in four paired colon cancer cell lines
isogenic for p53 deletion or mutation (25). p53-deficient cell
lines were more sensitive to PLK1 inhibitors and a PLK1
inhibitor as a single agent caused regression of p53 null
tumors. Another approach focuses on compound screening in
a p53 temperature-sensitive model killing cells at 39˚C
(mutant p53 status), but not at 32˚C (wild-type p53 status)
(26). Vulnerability of p53 deficient tumor cell lines versus
metformin, a diabetic drug, was described (27). The
mechanism of killing is based on inhibition of oxidative
phosphorylation and activation of AMP-activated protein
kinase (AMPK) which creates an environment more
vulnerable to p53 mutant cells. In p53 mutant cells, the G1
checkpoint is abrogated due to lack of p53-mediated p21
induction in response to DNA damage. Further abrogation of
the G2 checkpoint control will selectively kill p53-deficient
cancer cells through induction of mitotic catastrophe. UCN01,
a G2 checkpoint abrogator, sensitizes p53 mutant cancer cell
lines to irradiation abrogating G2 checkpoint control (28).
Nuclear serine/threonine family kinase WEE-1 is a DNA
damage-induced kinase involved in the G2/M checkpoint
preventing cell-cycle progression through inactivation of the
CDK1 by phosphorylation (29). Inhibition of WEE-1 exerts a
cytotoxic effect on p53 deficient tumor cells (30). Similar
observations were made through knock-down experiments for
other G2/M checkpoint regulators such as checkpoint kinase 1
(CHK1), dual specificity kinase (MYT1) and serine-threonine
kinase ataxia telangiectasia mutated (ATM) (31, 32). Mutant
p53 was shown to induce the GEF-H1 oncogene, a guanine
nucleotide exchange factor-H1 for RAS homology gene
family member A (RHOA) resulting in accelerated
proliferation of tumor cells and therefore is a possible target
for an SL-related approach (33). Synthetic lethal interaction
between p53 and the serine/threonine protein kinases SGK2
and PAK3 was observed making use of a panel of 100 hairpin
RNAs targeting essential kinases in human papilloma virus
(HPV)-transformed human cervical carcinoma cells (34). SL
was mediated as a consequence of p53 inactivation by HPV
E6 protein (HPV E6). The experiments suggest that the
mechanisms of SL are different for the two kinases: SGK2
depletion caused autophagy, whereas PAK3 depletion caused
caspase 3 activation. These findings suggest that SGK2 and

CANCER GENOMICS & PROTEOMICS 8: 159-172 (2011)

162
PAK3 are not components of the same pathway but represent
independent types of sensitivities. The results do not indicate
whether kinase activity of SGK2 and PAK3 is important for
SL after p53 loss. PAK3 has been implicated in actin filament
regulation in proliferating cells (35); for SGK2 no functionrelated
data are available. Silencing of MAP kinase-activated
protein kinase 2 (MK2) was shown to exhibit SL in the
context of p53 deficiency in the presence of DNA damage
(36). MK2 depletion decreased the phosphorylation level of
dual specificity phosphatase Cdc 25A/B (mammalian
homologues of the S. pombe 25A and 25B genes) providing
initial evidence that MK2 plays an important role in cell-cycle
checkpoints. Another SL relationship was uncovered for
retinoblastoma protein (Rb) and S-phase kinase-associated
protein 2 (Skp2) (37). Knock-out of the pRb target Skp2 in
pRb+/– mice induced apoptosis and completely inhibited
tumorigenesis in the pituitary intermediate lobe. Skp2 is a
substrate-recruiting component of the Skp, Cullin, F-Box
containing complex SCF (Skp2) E3 ubiquitin ligase. One of
its substrates is Thr187 phosphorylated p27 (Kip1). A
p27T187A mutation (knock-in) phenocopied Skp2 knock-out
in inducing apoptosis following Rb loss. Thus Skp2 knockout
or p27T187A knock-in are synthetically lethal together
with pRb inactivation.

Protein Kinase Network and SL

An example of an approved drug exploiting SL is the
rapamycin derivative CCI-779, which exhibits enhanced
activity against tumors with mutations in phosphatase and
tensin homologue (PTEN) compared to tumors with wildtype
PTEN. Target of CCI-779 is the protein kinase mTOR
which acts downstream of the phosphoinositide 3-kinaseAKT
(PI3K-AKT) pathway which is up-regulated in PTENdeficient
tumors (38). EGFR/Notch signaling seem to be
essential parts of a protein kinase network in basal-like
breast cancer (BLBC). 15% of the breast carcinomas are of
the BLBC subtype and are characterized by absence of
expression of estrogen receptor (ER), progesterone receptor
(PR) and human epidermal growth factor receptor 2 (HER2),
EGFR and Notch-signaling are frequently activated in this
type of cancer. Inhibition of EGFR or Notch signaling alone
is insufficient to suppress BLBC tumor cell survival and
proliferation; simultaneous suppression has uncovered a
synthetic lethal relationship between the two oncogenic
pathways (39). The relationship is due to a decrease in AKT
activation after simultaneous pathway inhibition. Expression
of an activated form of Notch-1 was shown to restore AKT
activity after dual pathway blockade. Combined inhibition of
both pathways also resulted in dramatic improvement of in
vivo activity. A synthetic lethal approach for treating
glioblastoma was described (40). Amplification of EGFR or
truncation mutant of EGFR plays an important role in the

pathogenesis of glioblastoma (41). Suppression of both
EGFRvIII and AKT-2 significantly inhibited tumor growth
by inducing apoptosis and prolonged the duration of median
survival in a glioblastoma xenograft model from 14 to 31.5
d. However, it was not shown whether knock-down of
EGFRvIII suppresses AKT activity. Also there is no
explanation for the observation that SL is specific for the
knock-down of AKT-2 and not for AKT-1 and AKT-3 keeping
in mind that these molecules have similar functions. The
issue of context-specificity of the observed phenomenon has
also not been investigated. The latter issue can be resolved
by evaluation of cell lines with different genetic background
and corresponding knock-down experiments. A striking SL
relationship has been revealed in the context of studying
insulin-like growth factor (IGFR-1) inhibitor-resistant
childhood sarcomas (42). The experiments revealed that
BMS-536924 resistant cell lines are sensitive to loss of distal
rather than proximal IGFR-1 signaling components, such as
ribosomal protein S6 (RPS6), and that BMS-536924 fails to
block RPS6 activation in resistant sarcoma cell lines and that
knock-out of macrophage-stimulating 1 receptor tyrosine
kinase (MST1R, also known as RON), restores BMS-536924
efficacy even in highly resistant cell lines. It was found that
loss of MST1R by RNAi blocks downstream RPS6
activation. This is just another example of the exploitation of
protein kinase networks for the identification of a synthetic
lethal relationship. The protein kinase network based SL
interactions are summarized in Figure 4.

MYC-related SL

Myelocytomatosis viral oncogene homolog MYC is a
transcription factor overexpressed in many types of neoplasia,
but its tractability with pharmacologic agents is a problematic
issue. An alternative is to exploit synthetic lethal interactions
between overexpressed MYC and other targets in tumor cells,
leaving non-transformed cells unaffected (43-45). Antimalaria
agent chloroquine showed MYC-selective killing of
tumor cells including autophagy resulting in induction of p53
dependent apoptosis (46). Cell death was not impaired by a
genetic deficiency of autophagy-related protein (atg7).
Chloroquine appeared to be active as a preventive agent in a
mouse model of B-cell lymphoma, but did not mediate tumor
growth inhibition as a single agent. Overexpression of MYC
sensitizes fibroblasts to agonists of the death receptor DR5
(47). It was shown that MYC mediates increased DR5
expression and signaling as a result of enhanced procaspase 8
autocatalytic activity. Screening of a library of small RNAs
revealed a synthetic lethal interaction between MYC
activation and glycogen synthase kinase 3β (GSK 3β) whose
inactivation potentiates TNF-related apoptosis-inducing
ligand (TRAIL) specifically in MYC overexpressing cells
(48). Small RNA-mediated silencing of GSK-3β prevents

Weidle et al: Synthetic Lethality-based Targets for Discovery of New Cancer Therapeutics (Review)

163
phosphorylation of MYC on T58, inhibiting recognition of
MYC by the E3 ubiquitin ligase component Fbox/WD repeat
containing protein 7 (FBW7). This results in stabilization of
MYC, up-regulation of TRAIL death receptor 5 (DR5) and

potentiation of DR5 induced apoptosis in vitro and in vivo.
These findings identify GSK-3β and FBW7 as cancer-related
targets and demonstrate paradoxically that up-regulation of cMYC
can result in a preclinical therapeutic benefit. Mutations

CANCER GENOMICS & PROTEOMICS 8: 159-172 (2011)

164

Figure 4. Synthetic lethality with involvement of protein kinase networks. First and second rows highlight targets and pathways involved in the
synthetic lethal interaction, the third row shows the final synthetic lethal interactions. EGFRvIII: Epidermal growth factor receptor variant III;
IGFR: insulin-like growth factor receptor; MST1R: macrophage-stimulating 1 receptor tyrosine kinase; mTOR: mammalian target of rapamycin;
PI3K: phosphoinositide 3 kinase; RPS6: ribosomal protein 6. Dark blue, and light and dark brown boxes highlight the context as well as the partners
involved in synthetic lethal partnerships and the box in light blue indicates the MOA of the synthetic lethal partnerships.

Figure 5. MYC-related synthetic lethal interactions. The second row displays targets which are involved in synthetic lethality together with c-MYC
or n-MYC and the third row highlights the underlying MOA. c-MYC and N-MYC are transcription factors. CDK1,2: cyclin-dependent kinases 1 and
2; CPPC: chromosomal passenger protein complex; FBW7: Fbox/WD repeat-containing protein 7; GSK3β: glycogen synthase kinase 3β. Yellow
and brown boxes indicate the partners forming a synthetic lethal partnership and blue boxes show the MOA for synthetic lethality.
in the T58 GSK-3β phosphorylation site of MYC and
inhibition of its degradation by the proteasome has been
described in Burkitt’s lymphoma (49, 50), whereas
inactivating mutations of FBW7 have been reported in several
types of tumors including breast, ovarian, endometrial,
pancreatic and colorectal carcinomas (51). These mutations
correlate with in vitro responsiveness to TRAIL agonists and
it will be of interest whether they can be used for patient
stratification (48). Overexpression of MYC mediates

sensitization to apoptosis when CDK1 is inhibited genetically
or pharmacologically (52). It was shown that CDK1
inhibition leads to depletion of survivin thus resulting in
apoptosis. CDK2 is often overexpressed in neuroblastomas
with poor prognosis and a SL relationship was demonstrated
with n-MYC amplification (53). Genetic and pharmacologic
disruption of CDK2 results in p53-dependent apoptosis in nMYC
amplified neuroblastomas. A synthetic lethal interaction
has been described between cells that overexpress c-MYC

Weidle et al: Synthetic Lethality-based Targets for Discovery of New Cancer Therapeutics (Review)

165

Figure 6. VHL-mediated synthetic lethality. The rows show targets of VHL for synthetic lethality and the mode of killing of affected cancer cells. CDK6:
Cyclin-dependent kinase 6; MEK1: mitogen-activated protein kinase 1; MET: hepatocyte growth factor receptor; mTOR: mammalian target of rapamycin.
Pink and brown boxes indicate the partners forming a synthetic lethal partnership and the blue boxes refer to the MOA for synthetic lethality.

Figure 7. Repair-deficiency based synthetic lethality. The rows show the partners for synthetic lethality; loss of function of the corresponding partner
molecules results in synthetic lethality. BRCA: Breast cancer susceptibility protein; DHFR: dihydrofolate reductase; DNA Pol β and γ: DNA
polymerase β and γ; MSH1, MSH2, MSH6, MLH1: mismatch-repair proteins; PARP: poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase; PINK1: PTEN-induced putative
kinase 1; PTEN: phosphatase and tensin homolog. Purple and brown boxes indicate the partners forming synthetic lethal relationships and the blue
box highlights the consequence of the synthetic lethal partnership.
and aurora B kinase (54). Exposure of cells to aurora B
kinase inhibitor VX-680 selectively kills cells that
overexpress c-MYC. Supporting RNAi experiments have
shown that the effect is due to inhibition of aurora B kinase
and consequent disabling of the chromosomal passenger
protein complex (CPPC) and ensuing DNA replication in the
absence of cell division. Bimodal killing due to apoptosis and
autophagy is not dependent on p53. Efficacy of VX-680 was
demonstrated in mouse models of B- and T-cell lymphomas
induced by c-MYC as a transgene. Overexpression of c-MYC
might be a biomarker for cells which are sensitive to VX-680.
Independently it was reported that aurora kinases A and B are
up-regulated by MYC and are essential for the maintenance
of the malignant state (55). Corresponding SL interactions are
summarized in Figure 5.

von Hippel-Lindau (VHL) and SL

Molecular and genetic studies have revealed the loss of the
VHL gene as a frequent and crucial event for the
pathogenesis of clear cell renal carcinoma. Due to the high
mortality rate associated with this type of cancer,
exploitation of this finding for drug development seems to
be a straight-forward approach. VHL is a component of a
protein complex that includes elongin B, elongin C and
cullin 2 and possesses E3 ubiquitin ligase activity (56, 57).
The VHL gene product is involved in ubiquitination and
degradation of hypoxia-inducible factor (HIF) which is a
transcription factor that plays a central role in regulation of
gene expression by oxygen. Using publicly available data
and analytical tools, chromomycin A3 (ChA3) was identified
as an agent that showed genotype-selective toxicity against
VHL-deficient cells (58). Co-culture of VHL-deficient and
VHL-positive cells showed selective killing of the VHLdeficient
cells. Mechanistically ChA3 is known to bind to the
minor groove of DNA interfering with replication and
transcription. ChA3 does not seem to mimic the action of
VHL, because it had little effect on HIF-1α levels. A highthroughput
screening approach identified STF-6224 as an
agent with selective toxicity for VHL-deficient renal cancer
cells (59, 60). It was demonstrated that the cytotoxicity of
STF-62247 is due to deregulated autophagy. The reduction
of protein levels of autophagy-related genes Atg5, Atg7 and
Atg9 reduce the sensitivity of VHL-deficient cells to killing
by STF-62247. This compound induced the formation of
large intracytoplasmic vacuoles characteristic of cells
undergoing autophagy, which is a lysosomal degradation
pathway that regulates turnover of organelles and long-lived
proteins. There is no evidence for apoptosis as a mediator of
cell death since there was no increase in DNA condensation,
increase in annexin V/propidium iodide or activation of
caspase 3. Making use of yeast genetics it was shown that
trafficking through the Golgi apparatus is an important

pathway in STF-62247-induced autophagic toxicity. Several
genes important in Golgi trafficking were identified as VHL
targets. VHL–/– cells display increased sensitivity to mTOR
(mammalian target of rapamycin) inhibition which can also
promote autophagy (61). Making use of a synthetic lethal
screen it was shown that CDK6 is required for the survival of
VHL-negative cells (62). Sensitization to inhibition to
mitogen activated protein kinase kinase 1 (MEK1) and
hepatocyte growth factor receptor MET was observed.
Corresponding SL interactions are summarized in Figure 6.

Repair-related Lethality

DNA can be damaged by chemicals, chemotherapy, UVirradiation,
ionizing radiation and reactive species derived
from cellular and oxidative metabolism. Single-strand breaks
can be repaired through base excision repair (BER), bulky
adducts through nucleotide excision repair (NER) and
mismatches through insertion or deletion by mismatch repair
(MMR) (63, 64). Double-strand breaks are repaired by
homologous recombination (HR), a process that restores the
original DNA sequence, or by non-homologous end-joining
(NHEJ) or single-strand annealing (SSA) (63, 64). The latter
processes lack fidelity to germ-line sequence.
Poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) and breast cancer
susceptibility (BRCA) proteins are essential for the repair of
DNA breaks and when defective, lead to the accumulation of
mutations introduced by error-prone DNA repair. BRCA1 and
BRCA2 regulate repair of damaged DNA through HR (65).
At the site of double-stranded DNA damage, one strand of
the DNA is degraded creating a stretch of single-stranded
DNA which is bound by RAD51 (eukaryotic homolog of
prokaryotic RecA protein) forming filamentous structures
(66). The RAD51 foci promote recognition of homologous
sequences on the sister chromatid and catalyse pairing
between complimentary sequences. PARP is a nuclear protein
that is activated when DNA is damaged (67, 68). Of the six
PARP enzymes, PARP1 is essential for repair of single-strand
breaks predominantly through the BER mechanism (69).
Continuous inhibition of PARP leads to double-stranded
breaks during DNA replication resulting in stalling of
replication forks at the location of DNA damage. Repair of
double-stranded DNA breaks depends on the HR pathway
(69). The corresponding SL interactions are summarized in
Figure 7. The MMR pathway is involved in removal of DNA
base mismatches which arise during DNA replication or are
introduced by DNA damage. Four gene products are essential
for MMR: MSH2, MLH1, PMS2 and MSH6. Mutations in
these predispose to hereditary nonpolyposis colon cancer
(Lynch syndrome) (70). DNA damage is recognized by the
components of the MMR pathway. The MutSα
(MSH2/MSH6) heterodimer recognizes single-base
mismatches and small insertion-deletion loops (IDL). The

CANCER GENOMICS & PROTEOMICS 8: 159-172 (2011)

166
MutSβ (MSH2/MSH3) heterodimer recognizes singlenucleotide
IDL and longer IDLs. The mismatches are
associated with MutL, which is recognized by MutS, are
excised and repaired. Details of the mammalian MMR as a
post-replicative process are described in (71).

BRCA and PARP Inhibition-mediated SL

BRCA deficient cells are 1000-fold more sensitive to single
agent PARP inhibition than are wild-type BRCA1/2 cells
(72, 73). Women with a heterozygous deleterious germline
mutation of BRCA1 or BRCA2 carry an increased risk of
developing breast or ovarian cancer (74). Since BRCAs are
involved in HR and the dependence of DNA breaks by repair
through PARP1, these cells are exquisitely sensitive to PARP
inhibition. Cells in persons with an inherited BRCA mutation
contain a wild-type and a mutated BRCA gene. Malignant
cells, however, are homozygous with respect to the BRCA
mutation status. HR remains intact in the presence of a
normal BRCA allele, therefore non-malignant cells should be
much less affected by PARP inhibition. The preclinical
studies demonstrated a synthetic lethal interaction of PARP1
inhibition with BRCA1/2 mutation. In xenograft studies,
pharmacological inhibition of PARP1 by AG14361 or
KU0058684 resulted in tumor regression in BRCA1/2-
deficient cell lines compared to BRCA1/2 wild-type or
heterozygote cell lines (72, 73). Clinical proof-of-concept
has been achieved with PARP inhibitor olaparib. Antitumor
efficacy has only been observed with BRCA1/2 mutation
carriers (75). Poly-ADP-formation and γH2X was assessed
in peripheral blood mononuclear cells and plucked eyebrowhair
follicles and indicated that more than 90% PARP
inhibition was achieved with tolerable doses. Phase II studies
in chemotherapy-refractory breast and ovarian tumors with
BRCA1/2 mutations indicated 41% and 33% objective
response rates according to the response evaluation criteria
in solid tumors (RECIST) (76, 77).
PARP inhibitors are also evaluated in patients with triple
negative breast cancer (TNBC), an aggressive subtype of
breast cancer that lacks expression of ER and PR and HER2
(78). BRCA-deficient basal-like tumors and TNBC show
clinical and pathologic similarities (79-81). The BRCA
pathway and subsequent HR is compromised in a subset of
TNBC patients. The molecular basis is due to different
mechanisms such as decreased BRCA1 messenger RNA
expression (82), BRCA gene promoter methylation,
overexpression and copy number gain of ID4, a negative
regulator of BRCA1 (83), and copy number aberrations
affecting genes within the BRCA damage-response pathway.
These observations support the concept of defective HR in
patients with TNBC which is referred to as BRCAness (84).
Preliminary results of evaluation of a number of PARP
inhibitors in patients with BRCA-mutated tumors and TNBC

are summarized in (85). RAD51 foci formation is explored as
a biomarker for HR function and sensitivity to PARP
inhibitors. Cells with intact HR form RAD51 foci within the
nucleus due to the localization of RAD51 to double-stranded
DNA breaks. These foci can be visualized by
immunohistochemistry. Dysfunction of BRCA1/2 restricts
formation of RAD51 foci (86).

MMR and SL

A synthetic lethal interaction between MSH2 deficiency and
treatment with methotrexate has been identified (87).
MSH2-deficient cells accumulate 8-oxo-guanine (8-oxoG)
after treatment with methotrexate in contrast to MSH2-
proficient cells. Accumulation of this DNA-damage product
seems to be incompatible with cell survival. A
corresponding phase II study is ongoing with incorporation
of 8-oxoG as a biomarker. In extension of these findings it
was shown that MSH2-deficient cells are killed by
inhibition of DNA polymerase β (DNA Polβ), in contrast
MLH1/DNA Polβ SL was not observed. Inhibition of DNA
Polγ is synthetically lethal with MLH1 deficiency (88).
Interestingly, MSH2/DNA Polβ SL correlated with nuclear
accumulation of 8-oxoG DNA lesions, whereas in the case
of MLH1/DNA Polγ SL, 8-oxoG DNA lesions accumulated
in mitochondria pointing to distinct nuclear and
mitochondrial pathways of MMR (89, 90). Current estimates
indicate that defective MMR affects 15-17% of all colorectal
carcinomas (91, 92). MMR deficiency might result from
inheritance of a mutated MMR gene, a somatic mutation of
a MMR gene, epigenetic modification of MMR genes or a
combination of mutation and epigenetic modification.
Affected genes are MLH1, MSH2, MSH6 and PMS2 (93,
94). Recently it was shown that silencing of PTEN-induced
putative kinase 1 (PINK1) is synthetically lethal in MMR
deficient cell lines based on dysfunction of MSH2, MLH1
or MSH6 (95). Inhibition of PINK1 resulted in increase of
reactive oxygen species and nuclear and mitochondrial
oxidative lesions based on 8-oxoG. Increase of 8-oxoG
lesions holds true for SL based on MSH2/Polβ, MLH1/Polγ
and PINK1/MMR deficiency, indicating that quantitation of
8-oxoG lesions might be a potential drug efficacy marker.
Loss of PTEN function has been shown to result in SL
together with PARP inhibition (96). Cells with PTEN
deficiency were 20-fold more sensitive to PARP inhibitors.
PTEN null cells showed defective checkpoint regulation
after treatment with ionizing irradiation resulting in
aneuploidy (97) and chromosomal instability in PTEN null
cells due to decreased levels of RAD51, which is involved
in double-stranded break repair (98). Interestingly, the effect
of PTEN in this context was not dependent on its
phosphatase activity, but was at least partially dependent on
its ability to shuttle to the nucleus.

Weidle et al: Synthetic Lethality-based Targets for Discovery of New Cancer Therapeutics (Review)

167
Contextual SL

Hypoxia can inhibit DNA MMR, NER and double-strand
break repair (DBR) (99). Functional heterozygosity of
repair-related genes can occur through mutation, deletion
or hypermethylation. Hypoxia can lead to decreased
expression of the remaining allele of repair-related genes
and therefore contribute to tumor progression, but also
render hypoxic cells susceptible to SL. Reduced expression
of genes involved in HR such as RAD51, BRCA1 and
BRCA2 under hypoxic conditions has been reported (100,
101). PARP inhibitors might confer SL in this context with
the caveat that proliferation of tumor cells is required
because PARP inhibitors confer their toxicity by inducing
collapsed replication forks (73). It has been shown that
reductions in DNA-repair gene expression by moderate
levels of hypoxia is still compatible with proliferation (99).
Recently it was shown that under acute or prolonged
hypoxia, survival of tumor cells was dramatically decreased
after treatment with PARP inhibitors, including a decrease
in RAD51 (102). Irradiated tumors that had been pretreated
with PARP inhibitors had a lower survival time than
control xenografts that were treated with vehicle alone.
Notably, non-tumor cells were not killed by the
combination of irradiation and PARP inhibitors. The issues
as outlined have to be investigated in more detail,
especially in the context of imaging techniques for
monitoring tumor hypoxia and responsiveness to inhibitors
of repair-related pathways.

Conclusion

As already outlined, treatment of tumors addicted to activated
pathways can result in significant improvement in terms of
progression-free survival and overall survival. Oncogene
addiction due to activating point mutations or fusion proteins
is an Achilles’ heel of defined subtypes of cancer regarding
treatment with anti-cancer therapeutics. Patients with
corresponding alterations can be identified with appropriate
diagnostic tests resulting in identification of a subpopulation
of patients with potential sensitivity for the corresponding
drugs. Another Achilles’ heel of tumor cells is based on
vulnerability of tumor subtypes with respect to simultaneous
inactivation of two genes such as inactivation of a tumor
suppressor gene and another defined gene, inhibition of a
mutated or overexpressed oncogene together with another
gene, or inactivation of two defined genes which are part of a
protein kinase network. Inactivation status of tumor suppressor
genes, mutation status, overexpression of oncogenes and
activation status of protein kinases under consideration can be
determined in tumor biopsies with diagnostic tests depending
on the targets under consideration. Sequencing of the genome
of defined tumor entities in combination with RNAi-based

screens for synthetic lethality will probably identify new
targets for personalized treatment of cancer.
As outlined many clinical studies covering DNA-repair
related SL are ongoing and a clearer picture between the
usefulness of biomarkers, clinical efficacy and correlation
with defined target-related molecular alterations will emerge.
Clinical proof-of-concept has been demonstrated by inhibition
of PARP in BRCA1/2-deficient breast and ovarian tumors and
inhibition of mTOR in renal carcinomas with VHL mutations.
Clinical studies targeting other types of SL will soon be
started. Also the potential development of resistance
mechanisms will be a matter of investigation. Reconstitution
of BRCA function has been observed after treatment of
BRCA-deficient (point mutated) breast cancer cells with a
PARP inhibitor (103). Restoration of p53 and VHL tumor
suppressor gene function based on mutations after treatment
with a corresponding inhibitor are also formally possible, but
have not been reported. Substitution of protein kinase-related
SL interactions by activation of other pathways or the
emergence of activating mutations in the case of targeting
enzymes are also possible alerting issues. In any case, SLbased
approaches for treatment of cancer will extend the
concept of personalized treatment of cancer.

