Abstract
An apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) site is an obligatory cytotoxic
intermediate in DNA Base Excision Repair (BER) that is processed by human AP
endonuclease 1 (APE1). APE1 is essential for BER and an emerging drug target in
cancer. We have isolated novel small molecule inhibitors of APE1. In the current
study we have investigated the ability of APE1 inhibitors to induce synthetic
lethality in a panel of DNA double strand break (DSB) repair deficient and
proficient cells; a) Chinese hamster (CH) cells: BRCA2 deficient (V-C8), ATM
deficient (V-E5), wild type (V79) and BRCA2 revertant (V-C8(Rev1)). b) Human
cancer cells: BRCA1 deficient (MDA-MB-436), BRCA1 proficient (MCF-7), BRCA2
deficient (CAPAN-1 and HeLa SilenciX cells), BRCA2 proficient (PANC1 and control
SilenciX cells). We also tested synthetic lethality (SL) in CH ovary cells
expressing a dominant–negative form of APE1 (E8 cells) using ATM
inhibitors and DNA-PKcs inhibitors (DSB inhibitors). APE1 inhibitors are
synthetically lethal in BRCA and ATM deficient cells. APE1 inhibition resulted
in accumulation of DNA DSBs and G2/M cell cycle arrest. Synthetic lethality was
also demonstrated in CH cells expressing a dominant–negative form of
APE1 treated with ATM or DNA-PKcs inhibitors. We conclude that APE1 is a
promising synthetic lethality target in cancer.
Keywords:
Base excision repair (BER), BRCA deficiency, human apurinic, apyrimidinic endonuclease 1 (APE1), Synthetic lethal targeting, DNA repair, small molecule inhibitorsIntroduction
DNA base excision repair (BER) is critical for processing base damage induced
by alkylating agents and radiation
1
,
2
. Inhibitors that block BER,
specifically those developed against PARP [poly-(ADP-ribose)
polymerase], not only potentiate the cytotoxicity of chemotherapeutics and
radiation, but also induce synthetic lethality in BRCA-deficient breast and ovarian
cancers
3
-
5
. The BRCA genes encode BRCT repeat containing proteins that
facilitate the efficient resolution of DNA double-strand breaks (DSBs) through a
process called homologous recombination (HR). Cells lacking functional BRCA proteins
are deficient in HR, and thus dependent on the more error-prone non-homologous end
joining (NHEJ) pathway. This transition results in chromosomal instability, which
could include oncogene activation and tumour-suppressor deletion that drives the
malignant phenotype. Women carrying deleterious germline mutations in the BRCA1 and
BRCA2 genes have a high risk of developing breast and ovarian cancers
6
. It was recently demonstrated that
HR impaired BRCA deficient cells are hypersensitive to PARP inhibitors that block
single strand break (SSB) repair, a subpathway of BER
3
,
4
.
Although the precise mechanism for synthetic lethality is not fully known
7
, SSB repair inhibition may result in
the formation and accumulation of toxic DSBs at replication forks in BRCA deficient
cells and induces synthetic lethality
3
,
4
. Emerging data from clinical
trials using PARP inhibitors in BRCA deficient breast and ovarian tumours has
provided confirmatory evidence that synthetic lethality by targeting BER has the
potential to improve patient outcomes
8
.
Apurinic/apyrimidinic (AP) sites are obligatory repair intermediates in BER,
and are formed spontaneously or as products of damage-induced or enzyme-catalyzed
hydrolysis of the N-glycosylic bond. Unrepaired AP sites block replication fork
progression and generate SSBs that eventually progress to toxic DSBs. Moreover, the
ring opened aldehyde form of an AP site may be cytotoxic by virtue of its ability to
react with nuclear proteins resulting in protein-bound DNA lesions that further
interfere with DNA replication
9
-
15
. AP sites also affect
topoisomerase activity and/or trap topoisomerase-DNA covalent complexes
16
,
17
, contributing additional DNA strand breaks in genomic DNA.
A recent study in yeast lacking AP endonucelase activity, accumulation of DSB was
also demonstrated in G2 phase of the cell cycle
18
. In human BER, AP sites are processed predominantly by AP
endonuclease 1 (APE1), a multifunctional protein
1
. The DNA repair function is performed by the conserved
C-terminal domain of the human enzyme. APE1 is also intimately involved in the
coordination of BER and interacts with several factors within the pathway
1
. The N-terminal region of APE1 is
involved in redox regulation of transcription factors, reducing an oxidized cysteine
residue in the target protein to activate DNA binding and transcriptional activities
1
. The DNA repair and the
redox functions of APE1 can operate independently from each other. In addition, APE1
is also involved in acetylation-mediated gene regulation
19
and RNA quality control
20
.
APE1 is essential for cell growth and survival, and is an emerging anticancer
drug target. APE1 knockdown correlates with the accumulation of AP sites, induction
of apoptosis and reduced cell proliferation. APE1 depletion sensitizes mammalian
cells to a variety of DNA damaging agents
1
, and APE1 overexpression results in resistance to alkylating
agents, bleomycin and radiation
1
.
APE1 expression has prognostic and/or predictive significance in several human
tumours including ovarian and breast cancers
1
. Nuclear expression of APE1 has been consistently observed
in cervical, non–small cell lung cancer, rhabdomyosarcomas, and squamous
cell head-and-neck cancer
1
. High
APE1 expression correlates to poor survival in osteosarcoma. APE1 expression may
also predict response to cytotoxic therapy in cervical and germ cell tumours
1
. We and others have
initiated drug discovery programmes and isolated several small molecule inhibitor
compounds of APE1
21
-
27
. We have shown that APE1 inhibitors lead to
accumulation of AP sites
in vivo
and potentiate the cytotoxicity of
alkylating agents such as temozolomide in human cancer cell lines
21
-
24
.
The ability of PARP inhibitors (that block single strand break repair) to
induce synthetic lethality in BRCA deficient breast and ovarian cancers
3
-
5
implies that other factors within BER are potential synthetic
lethality targets. Given the essential role of APE1 in BER, we have investigated in
the current study the ability of APE1 inhibitors to induce synthetic lethality in
DSB repair deficient cells. This study using DNA repair deficient systems provides
the first evidence that APE1 inhibition is a promising new synthetic lethality
strategy in cancer.Materials and Methods
Compounds and reagents
APE1 inhibitors were purchased from ChemDiv Inc. (CA, USA),
Ukrorgsynthesis Ltd (Kiev, Ukraine) and Sigma-Aldrich (UK). E3330 and
methoxyamine were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich (UK). NU1025, NU7441 and KU55933
were purchased from Tocris Bioscience, UK. Wortmannin was obtained from
Calbiochem,UK. All compounds were dissolved in 100% DMSO and stored at
-20
0
C. shRNA for APE1 knock down and transfection reagents were
purchased from SA Biosciences, MD, USA.
Cell lines and culture
Previously well characterized CH lung fibroblast cells; V79 (Wild type),
V-C8 (BRCA-2 deficient), V-C8(Rev1) (BRCA2 revertant), and V-E5 (ATM-like
deficient)
28
,
29
were grown in Ham's F-10 media
(PAA, UK) [supplemented with 10% fetal bovine serum (FBS)
(PAA,UK) and 1% penicillin/streptomycin]. A CH ovary cell line
that allows tetracycline-regulated expression of a dominant–negative
form of APE1 (E8 cells) and its comparative control line (T-REx) were grown in
DMEM (InVitrogen, Carlsbad, CA, USA), supplemented with 10% FBS
(tet-minus; Clontech Laboratories Inc., Mountain View, CA, USA), and 1%
penicillin, streptomycin and glutamate
30
. The human breast cancer cell lines, MDA-MB-231 and
MCF-7, were grown in RPMI1640 (Sigma, UK). MDA-MB-436 (BRCA1 deficient human
breast cancer cell line) and PANC1 (human pancreatic cancer cell line) were
grown in DMEM (Sigma, UK). CAPAN1 (BRCA2 deficient human pancreatic cancer cell
line) was grown in IMDM (PAA, UK). All media used to culture human cancer cell
lines were supplemented with 10% FBS (PAA, UK) and 1%
penicillin/streptomycin. BRCA2 deficient HeLa SilenciX® cells and
control BRCA2 proficient HeLa SilenciX® cells were purchased from
Tebu-Bio (
www.tebu-bio.com
). HeLa SilenciX cells were grown in DMEM medium
(with L-Glutamine 580mg/L, 4500 mg/L D-Glucose, with 110mg/L Sodium Pyruvate)
supplemented with 10% FBS, 1% penicillin/streptomycin and 125
μg/ml Hygromycin B.
Clonogenic survival assay
For CH lung fibroblasts
,
two hundred cells per well were
seeded in six-well plates. Cells were allowed to adhere for 4 hours. Compounds
(APE1 inhibitors, E3330, methoxyamine, or APE1 non-inhibitors) were added at the
indicated concentrations. The plates were left in the incubator for 10 days.
After incubation, the media was discarded, fixed (with methanol and acetic acid
mixture) and stained with crystal violet.
For T-REx CH control and E8 cell lines, cells were grown to confluence,
then trypsinized and counted. One hundred fifty cells of each cell line were
subsequently transferred to each well of a six-well plate. Cells were allowed to
adhere for 2 hours before being treated with 1 μg/ml tetracycline
30
. At the end of 24
hour incubation, cells were treated for 1 hour at the indicated concentrations
of NU7441, KU55933 or Wortmannin. Cells were then gently washed 2 times with
1× phosphate buffered saline and incubated for 10 days in fresh DMEM to
allow colonies to form. Colonies were fixed with methanol, stained with
methylene blue and counted. Surviving fraction = (No. of colonies
formed/No. of colonies in untreated) ×100.
For human cancer cell lines, 200-400 cells per well were seeded in 6
well plates, and allowed to adhere for 4 hrs. APE1 inhibitor was then added at
indicated concentrations. The plates were left in the incubator for 12-14 days.
After 2 weeks of incubation, the media was discarded, fixed (with methanol and
acetic acid mixture) and stained with crystal violet. Colonies were counted and
survival fraction was calculated as follows: Surviving Fraction =
[No. of colonies formed/(No. of cells seeded × Plating
efficiency)] ×100. All clonogenic assays were done in
triplicate.
AQ
ueous
Non-Radioactive Cell Proliferation Assay (MTS
assay)
To evaluate cytotoxic agents by APE1 inhibitors, MTS assays were
performed as per the manufacturer's recommendation (Promega). Briefly,
2,000 cells per well (in 200 μL of medium) were seeded into a 96-well
plate. Cells were incubated with varying concentrations of APE1 inhibitors and
the MTS assay was performed on day 4.
Aldehyde Reactive Probe assay
AP sites were quantified as described previously
22
. Untreated cells were compared to cells
exposed to APE1 inhibitor. DNA was extracted pre-treatment, at 2 hours and 4
hours using the guanidine/detergent lysis method. AP site determinations were
performed on the genomic DNA using an aldehyde reactive probe assay kit using
the protocol provided by the manufacturer (BioVision Research Products, CA,
USA). All experiments were performed in triplicate.
Alkaline and neutral COMET assay
This assay was performed as described previously
31
. Briefly, sub-confluent cells were
exposed to APE1 inhibitor. At various time points after exposure (pretreatment,
2 hours, 4 hours, 8 hours, 24 hours and 48 hours) cells were extracted and comet
assays were performed. Alkali electrophoresis buffer consisted of 200 mM NaOH, 1
mM EDTA and pH 13. Neutral electrophoresis buffer (TBE buffer) consisted of (89
mM Tris-base, 89 mM Boric acid, 2 mM EDTA and pH 8.3. The slides were then
stained with SYBR® green (1:10,000 dilution) (Molecular Probes) for 10
minutes and images were visualized under a rhodamine filter with an Olympus BX40
microscope. The comets were analysed using Comet Assay III image analysis
software (Perceptive Instruments, Suffolk, UK). A total of 200 comet images were
evaluated for olive tail moment for each time point (pretreatment, 2 hours, 4
hours, 8 hours, 24 hours and 48 hours).
γH2AX immunocytochemistry
This assay was performed as described previously
3
. Briefly, cells were incubated in medium
containing APE1 inhibitor for 24 hours. After incubation, cells were washed,
permeabilized and incubated with primary anti–phosphohistone H2AX
(Ser139) antibody (clone JBW301, mouse monoclonal antibody; Upstate, Millipore
Corp.) (1:200 dilution in blocking buffer) at room temperature for 1 hour. After
incubation, the cells were washed and incubated with secondary anti-mouse
antibody (polyclonal goat anti-mouse immunoglobulins, DAKO, dilution 1:200) at
room temperature for 1 h in the dark, later washed, air dried at room
temperature, stained with DAPI and stored overnight at 4°C before
analyses. Images were obtained using Olympus BX40 microscope and the images
captured by cellSens (Vers 1.4) Imaging Software and camera (Olympus). The
frequencies of cells containing γH2AX foci were determined in 100 cells
per slide in three separate experiments. Nuclei containing more than six
γH2AX foci were considered positive.
Flow cytometric analyses (FACS)
Cells grown to sub-confluence were exposed to APE1 inhibitors and
collected by trypsinization and centrifugation (1000 rpm for 5 minutes). The
cell pellets were fixed in 70% ethanol in PBS, incubated at 4°C
for atleast 12 hours to allow fixation and then stored under these conditions
until FACS analyses. Prior to FACS analysis, fixed cells were harvested by
centrifugation (1000 rpm for 5 mins) and the pellet was resuspended in PBS
containing propidium iodide (2 μg/ml) and DNAse-free RNase A (10
μg/ml). After incubation at 37°C for 1 hr, the samples were
analysed by flow cytometry using a Becton Dickinson FACS machine with a 488nm
laser. Red fluorescence (DNA) was collected for 10,000 cells for each sample.
Data were analysed using Flow Jo7.6 software.
APE1 knock down using shRNA
Transfection reagent was prepared according to manufacturers guidelines
by adding 100 μl of Opti-MEM™ reduced –serum medium
(Gibco), 0.40 μg of scrambled and APE1 knock out sequence containing
shRNA plasmid (SA Bioscience) and 3 μl of Sure effect (SA Bioscience)
into appropriate wells of a 24-well cell culture plate and mixed gently by
rocking for 20 minutes. Cells at a density of 1.6 ×10
6
cells/ml were prepared according to manufacturers indicated protocol. When the
transfection complex formation was complete, 500μl of the cell
suspension was added, mixed gently and incubated in an atmosphere of 5%
CO
2
and 95% air for 24 to 48 hours. Cells were later
passaged into 6 well plates, incubated and selected in media containing
800μg/ml of G418 (Gibco) for seven days (The concentration for G418 was
selected after determining the dose response curve as recommended by the
manufacturer and media replaced every 72 hrs). Stable APE1 knock cells were
generated over a 12 weeks period and APE1 knockdown was confirmed by western
blot analysis.
Western blot analysis
Protein samples were prepared by lysing cells in RIPA buffer (20mM Tris,
150mM Nacl, 1% Nonidet p-40, 0.5% sodium deoxycholate, 1mMEDTA,
0.1% SDS) containing protease inhibitor (Sigma) and phosphatase
inhibitor cocktail 1 and 2 (Sigma). Western blot analyses was performed.
Membranes were incubated with primary antibodies (4°C/overnight, APE-1,
Novus Biologicals Inc, Littleton, CO 1:1000 dilution and Actin (Abcam) 1:10000
dilution) and infrared dye labeled secondary antibodies (Li-cor) (IRDye 800CW
Donkey Anti-Rabbit IgG (H+L) and IRDye 680CW Donkey Anti-Mouse IgG
(H+L) in the dilution of 1:15000 for 60 min. Protein expression was
determined by scanning the membranes on Licor-Odyssey's Scanner at the
predefined intensity fluorescence channel (700nm and 800nm).
Statistical analysis
Statistical significance of differences was determined using the student
t
-test in Microsoft Excel.Results
APE1 inhibitors
We have recently developed complementary drug screening strategies to
isolate APE1 inhibitors
21
-
24
. Although detailed biochemical
and cellular investigations have been presented in previous publications
21
-
24
,
Table
1
summarises several key features of the three top prototypical APE1
inhibitors selected for the current study. Inhibitor-1
(N-(4-fluorophenyl)-2-[4-phenylsulfonyl-2-(p-tolyl)oxazol-5-yl]sulfanyl-acetamide)
and inhibitor-2
(N-(9,10-dioxo-1-anthryl)-2-(1H-1,2,4-triazol-5-ylsulfanyl)acetamide) have an
IC
50
for APE1 inhibition of 11.6 μM and 4 μM,
respectively
22
, while
inhibitor-3 (3,5,7-Trihydroxy-2-(3,4,5-trihydroxyphenyl)- 4-chromenone, a.k.a.
myricetin) was reported to have an IC
50
of 0.32 μM
23
. All three inhibitors are
specific for APE1, in that they do not appear to interact with DNA and have no
activity against
E. coli
endonuclease IV (a functional homolog
with no sequence or structural homology to APE1). All these compounds have been
found to be potent inhibitors of AP site cleavage activity in HeLa whole cell
extract assays, lead to accumulation of AP sites
in vivo
in
cancer cells (confirming target inhibition) and to potentiate the cytotoxicity
of alkylating agents in cancer cell lines
22
,
23
. Molecular
modelling studies indicate that these compounds dock onto the active site of
APE1
22
,
23
. Methoxyamine, a non-specific indirect
inhibitor of APE1, binds irreversibly to AP sites in DNA
15
and prevents APE1 (and endonuclease IV)
from processing the adducted AP lesion. E3330 is a APE1 redox domain inhibitor
and does not inhibit the AP site cleavage activity of the protein
32
. Three non-inhibitors of APE1
from a previous screen
22
were
also chosen randomly as negative controls. NU1025, a well characterised PARP
inhibitor, was chosen as a positive control. These compounds were employed
collectively to explore synthetic lethality relationships in a panel of DNA
repair deficient cells.
Table 1
APE1 Inhibitors
Inhibitor
Structure
APE1 inhibition
Endo IV inhibition
IC
50
BRCA2(−/−):SL
ATM(−/−):SL
N-(4-fluorophenyl)-2-[4-phenylsulfonyl-2-(p-tolyl)oxazol-5-yl]sulfanyl-acetamide
Open in a separate window
+
−
11.6 μM
+
+
N-(9,10-dioxo-1-anthryl)-2-(1H-1,2,4-triazol-5-ylsulfanyl)acetamide
Open in a separate window
+
−
4 μM
+
+
3,5,7-Trihydroxy-2-(3,4,5-trihydroxyphenyl)- 4-chromenone
(Myricetin)
Open in a separate window
+
−
0.32 μM
+
+
Methoxyamine
*
Open in a separate window
+
+
NA
+
+
(2E)-2-[(4,5-Dimethoxy-2-methyl-3,6-dioxo-1,4-cyclohexadien-1-yl)methylene]-undecanoic
acid (E3330)
**
Open in a separate window
−
−
−
−
−
Open in a separate window
*
= methoxyamine binds irreversibly to AP site in DNA. Methoxyamine
bound AP sites are resistant to processing by APE1. Therefore, methoxyamine
is an indirect inhibitor of APE1.
**
= E3330 blocks redox domain activity of APE1 but has no inhibitory
activity on the DNA repair domain of APE1. IC
50
=
biochemical inhibition of AP site cleavage activity, SL= synthetic
lethality.
APE1 inhibitors exhibit increased toxicity against BRCA2 deficient and ATM
deficient CH cells
V79 (Wild type), V-C8 (BRCA-2 deficient) and V-C8(Rev1) (BRCA2
revertant) were investigated in clonogenic survival assays.
Figure 1
demonstrates that inhibitor-1 (
Figure 1A
), inhibitor-2 (
Figure 1B
) and inhibitor-3 (
Figure
1C
) induce reduced survival of V-C8 cells in comparison to V79 and
V-C8(Rev1) cells. We then tested APE1 inhibitors in V-E5 cells (ATM-like
deficient).
Figure 1D
demonstrates that
inhibitor-1 is more toxic to V-E5 cells than V-79 cells. A similar lethality
profile was also seen when using inhibitors-2 and -3 (
Table 1
). Similar results were also seen with MTS
assays. We then tested the effects of methoxyamine.
Figure 1E
demonstrates that methoxyamine is more
lethal to V-C8 cells than V79 and V-C8(Rev1) cells. Similar lethality was also
demonstrated with methoxyamine in V-E5 cells (data not shown). E3330, the redox
inhibitor of APE1, did not show increased toxicity to V-C8 (
Figure 1F
) or V-E5 cells (data not shown). We also
investigated the ability of NU1025 (PARP inhibitor) to induce lethality in our
model systems.
Figure 2A
demonstrates the
expected synthetic lethality of NU1025 in V-C8 cells compared to V79 and
V-C8(Rev1) cells. Similar synthetic lethality was seen in V-E5 cells with NU1025
as well (data not shown). As an additional control, we tested three
non-inhibitors of APE1 randomly chosen from a previous screen
22
.
Figure 2B
shows that non-inhibitor-1 (tested at concentrations
similar to the above APE1 inhibitors) did not induce lethality in V-C8 or V-E5
cells compared to V79 and V-C8(Rev1) cells. The other two non-inhibitors also
did not induce lethality (data not shown).
Open in a separate window
Figure 1
Clonogenic survival assays for CH lung cells. Inhibitors were added at the
indicated concentrations (see methods for details):
A.
Inhibitor-1,
B
. Inhibitor-2, and
C.
Inhibitor-3 with V-C8, V79
and V-C8(Rev1) cells.
D
. Inhibitor-1 with V-E5 and V79 cells.
E.
Methoxyamine induces synthetic lethality in V-C8 cells
compared to V-79 and V-C8 (Rev1) cells.
F
. E3330 does not induce
synthetic lethality in V-C8 cells. Survival of V-C8 cells is similar to V79 and
V-C8 (Rev1) cells.
Open in a separate window
Figure 2
Clonogenic survival assays. Inhibitors were added at indicated concentrations
(see methods for details).
A.
NU1025 induces synthetic lethality in
V-C8 cells compared to V79 and V-C8 (Rev1) cells.
B
.
Non-inhibitor-1 has no effect on V-C8 cells. Survival of V-C8 cells is similar
to V79 and V-C8 (Rev1) cells. Clonogenic survival assays for T-REx CHO control
cells and E8 cells.
C.
NU7441,
D.
KU55933, and
E.
Wortmannin. Results shown in panels C-E represent the
average and standard deviation of six independent data points.
F.
Western blot (inset) confirming stable APE1 knock down (KO) in MDA-MB-231
treated with shRNA constructs compared to scramble and wild type cells.
Clonogenic survival assays preformed with wortmannin at the indicated
concentrations.
DSB repair inhibitors induce lethality in CH cells expressing
dominant-negative APE1 or human cancer cells depleted for APE1
A CH ovary cell line (E8) was recently generated to permit
tetracycline-regulated expression of a dominant–negative form of APE1
30
. Tetracycline
induced E8 cells were shown to be BER deficient, in that they lack efficient AP
site processing and display hypersensitive to DNA base damaging agents and
certain anti-metabolites
30
.
We have exploited this model system to investigate if DSB repair inhibitors such
as KU55933 (ATM kinase inhibitor), NU7441 (DNA-PKcs inhibitor) and Wortmannin
(broad spectrum DSB inhibitor) would induce lethality in BER defective CH cells.
Each of these inhibitor compounds was found to be more toxic to the tetracycline
induced E8 cell line in comparison to the T-REx CH ovary control cells (
Figure 2C, Figure 2D and Figure 2E
). We also
confirmed this observation in E8 cells only that were either tetracycline
induced (tet
+
) or un-induced (tet
−
).
Western blot analysis for ED protein expression in the presence (+) or
absence (−) of tetracycline is shown in
supplemental Figure 2D
. E8
tet
+
cells are hypersensitive to NU7441 (
supplemental Figure 2A
), KU55933
(
supplemental Figure
2B
) and Wortmannin (
supplemental Figure 2C
).
To expand the studies using BER deficient CH cells, we developed a
stable APE1 knockdown human breast cancer cell line using shRNA.
Figure 2F
(inset) demonstrates that compared to wild
type and the scramble knockdown controls, cells transfected with APE1 shRNA had
a near complete knockdown of APE1. We then tested lethality with the DSB repair
inhibitors in this system.
Figure 2F
confirms that APE1 knockdown cells are hypersensitive to Wortmannin. Similar
results were seen with KU55933 and NU7441 (
supplemental Figures 1D and 1E
).
The results with human cancer cells concur with the data from the CH cells and
confirm that in BER deficient systems, DSB repair inhibition by small molecule
inhibitors likely leads to synthetic lethality.
Evidence for synthetic lethality upon APE1 inhibition in CH mutant
cells
The clonogenic survival studies presented above provide the first
evidence that modulation of APE1 is a promising new synthetic lethality
strategy. To provide further evidence, we proceeded to investigate the
functional consequence of APE1 inhibition in the DSB repair deficient and
proficient CH cells.
To determine targeted inhibition of APE1
in vivo
, the
aldehyde reactive probe assay was performed to measure the level of unrepaired
chromosomal AP sites.
Figure 3A
summarizes
the results for V79, V-C8 and V-C8(Rev1) cells treated with 10 μM of
inhibitor-1. In samples prior to inhibitor treatment, the background AP site
level in genomic DNA was low (range 2-3 AP sites per 10
5
base pairs).
Conversely, within 2 hours of treatment with 10 μM of inhibitor-1, cells
accumulated a significant number of AP sites (range 11-12 AP sites per
10
5
base pairs). At 4 hours, AP site accumulation increased
further to more than 15 AP sites per 10
5
base pairs in genomic DNA
(p<0.05). This data confirms APE1 specific inhibition
in
vivo
. Similar accumulation of AP sites was also demonstrated using
inhibitor-2 and inhibitor-3 (data not shown).
Open in a separate window
Figure 3
A.
Aldehyde Reactive Probe (ARP) assay. In pre-treatment samples,
background AP site level was low in all CH cell lines. At 2 hours and 4 hours of
treatment with 10 μM of inhibitor-1, cells accumulated a significantly
(p<0.001) higher level of AP sites. See text for details.
B.
Alkaline COMET assay. V-C8 cells demonstrated a higher mean
tail moment compared to V79 and V-C8(Rev1) cells at 24 hours (p=
0.0008).
C
. Neutral COMET assay was performed as described in
methods at various time points. Mean tail moment was higher in V-C8 cells at 24
hours (p=0.002) and 48 hours (p=0.003) compared to V-79 and
V-C8-Rev1 cells.
D.
γH2AX immunocytochemistry. After 24
treatment with 10μM of inhibitor-1, γH2AX positive cells are
more (p=0.04) in V-C8 cells compared to, V-C8 (Rev1) and V79 cells
(UT= untreated, T = treated).
E.
FACS analyses. At
24 hours, V-C8 cells were shown to be arrested in G2/M phase compared to V-79
cells. F. Quantification of each stage of cell cycle including standard
deviations is shown here. See text for details
The alkaline COMET assay detects natural AP sites, as well as SSBs and
DSBs.
Figure 3B
summarizes the results for
V79, V-C8 and V-C8(Rev1) cells treated with 10 μM of inhibitor-1.
Compared to pre-treatment samples, after 24 hours of exposure to APE1 inhibitor,
V-C8 cells demonstrate a significantly higher mean tail moment compared to V-79
and V-C8(Rev1) cells (p=0.0008). Such data indicates that V-C8 cells
accumulate alkaline sensitive sites and DNA strand breaks after exposure to an
APE1 inhibitor compared to V-79 and V-C8(Rev1) cells. Similar results were seen
with inhibitor-2 and inhibitor-3 (data not shown).
The neutral COMET assay specifically detects DSBs in DNA.
Figure 3C
summarizes the results for V79, V-C8 and
V-C8(Rev1) cells treated with 10 μM of inhibitor-1. Compared to
pre-treatment samples, after 24 hours of exposure to APE1 inhibitor, the mean
tail moment was significantly higher in V-C8 cells at 24 hours (p=0.002)
and at 48 hours (p=0.003) in comparison to V79 and V-C8(Rev1) cells.
This data demonstrates that V-C8 cells accumulate DSBs after exposure to an APE1
inhibitor compared to V79 and V-C8(Rev1) cells. Similar results were seen with
inhibitor-2 and inhibitor-3 (data not shown). We also demonstrated significant
accumulation of DSBs in VE5 cells compared to V79 cells at 24 hours
(p<0.006) and at 48 hours (p<0.001) (
supplemental Figure 1A
).
DSBs induce phosphorylation of H2AX at serine 139 (γH2AX), and
accumulation of γH2AX foci in the nucleus is a marker of DSBs
33
. Therefore, γH2AX
immunocytochemistry was performed in V-C8 cells, V-C8(Rev-1) and V-79 cells.
Nuclei containing more than six γH2AX foci were considered positive.
Cells were exposed to 10 μM inhibitor-1 for 24 hours and compared to
control samples prior to compound treatment. In V79 cells, the mean
γH2AX positive cells was 5 in pre-treatment cells and increased to 14
after the 24 hour treatment (
Figure 3D
). In
V-C8(Rev-1) cells, the mean γH2AX positive cells was 11 in pre-treatment
cells and increased to 20 after the 24 hour treatment. In V-C8 cells, the mean
γH2AX positive cells was 9 in pre-treatment cells and increased to 30
after the 24 hour treatment (p=0.04). The data here provide additional
evidence that V-C8 cells accumulate DSBs, consistent with the results obtained
using the neutral COMET assay (
Figure 3C
).
Similar γH2AX immunocytochemistry results were seen with inhibitor-2 and
inhibitor-3 (data not shown). Similarly, in VE5 cells, the mean γH2AX
positive cells were significantly high compared to wild type cells (
supplemental Figure 1B
)
(p=0.03). Although γ H2AX foci may be indicative of other types
of damage as well as DSBs, the data presented above along with the results
presented for neutral COMET assays implies that there is DSB accumulation in
BRCA deficient cells.
Accumulation of DSBs may delay cell cycle progression. FACS analyses
were therefore performed in V-C8 cells and V79 cells exposed to inhibitor-1 for
24 hours, and cell cycle progression was evaluated and compared to control
samples before treatment.
Figures 3E and 3F
summarise the data for cells treated with 10 μM of inhibitor-1. At 24
hours, V-C8 cells were shown to be arrested in G2/M phase of the cell cycle
compared to V79 cells. This is consistent with a previous study where a PARP
inhibitor was shown to induce G2/M arrest in BRCA deficient cells
4
. Similar cell cycle results were
seen with inhibitor-2 and inhibitor-3 (data not shown).
Evidence for synthetic lethality in BRCA deficient human cancer cell
lines
Studies in the DNA repair deficient CH systems presented above provide
clear mechanistic evidence that APE1 inhibition is a promising new synthetic
lethality strategy. To confirm this observation in human systems, we employed a
panel of human cancer cell lines known to be deficient in DSB repair.
Figure 4A
demonstrates that inhibitor-1 is
lethal in BRCA2 deficient HeLa SilenciX cells in comparison to control BRCA2
proficient SilenciX cells. We then performed neutral comet assays to evaluate
DSB accumulation (
Figure 4B
). The mean tail
moment was higher in BRCA2 deficient HeLa SilenciX cells at 24 hours
(p=0.01) and at 48 hours (p=0.01) post-treatment in comparison
to BRCA2 proficient control SilenciX cells. γH2AX immunocytochemistry
was performed as described above.
Figure 4C
summarises the results for cells treated with 10 μM of inhibitor-1. In
BRCA2 proficient control SilenciX cells, the mean γH2AX positive cells
was 14 in pre-treatment cells and increased to 28 after a 24 hour treatment with
inhibitor-1. In BRCA2 deficient SilenciX cells, the mean γH2AX positive
cells was 18 in pre-treatment cells and increased to 44 after a 24 hour
treatment (p=0.02).
Open in a separate window
Figure 4
A.
Inhibitor-1 induces synthetic lethality in BRCA2 deficient
SilenciX cells compared to BRCA2 proficient control SilenciX cells.
B.
Neutral COMET assay was performed as described in methods at
various time points. Mean tail moment was higher in BRCA2 deficient SilenciX
cells at 24 hours (p= 0.01) and 48 hours (p= 0.01) compared to
BRCA2 proficient control SilenciX.
C.
γH2AX
immunocytochemistry. After 24 hour treatment with 10μM of inhibitor-1,
γH2AX positive cells are significantly more (p=0.02) in BRCA2
deficient SilenciX compared to BRCA2 proficient control SilenciX (UT=
untreated, T = treated).
D.
Inhibitor-1 induces synthetic
lethality in CAPAN1 cells compared to PANC1 cells.
E.
NU1025
induces similar synthetic lethality in CAPAN1 cells compared to PANC1 cells.
We then evaluated lethality in well characterised BRCA deficient human
cancer cell lines.
Figure 4D
demonstrates
that inhibitor-1 is more toxic to BRCA2 deficient CAPAN1 pancreatic cancer cells
in comparison to BRCA2 proficient PANC1 pancreatic cancer cells. As a positive
control we tested NU1025 (PARP inhibitors) in this system and observed the
anticipated synthetic lethality (
Figure
4D
). We then performed neutral comet assays to evaluate DSB accumulation
(
Figure 5A
). The mean tail moment was
higher in CAPAN1 cells at 24 hours(p=0.03) and 48 hours (p=0.05)
post-treatment (inhibitor-1) in comparison to PANC1 cells (
Figure 5A
). γH2AX immunocytochemistry was also
performed, and
Figure 5B
summarises the
results for cells treated with 10 μM of inhibitor-1. In PANC1 cells, the
mean γH2AX positive cells was 7 in pre-treatment cells and increased to
11 after a 24 hour treatment with inhibitor-1. In CAPAN1 cells, the mean
γH2AX positive cells was 9 in pre-treatment cells and increased to 17
after a 24 hour treatment with 10 μM of inhibitor-1
(p=0.05).
Open in a separate window
Figure 5
A.
Neutral COMET assay was performed as described in methods at
various time points. Mean tail moment was significantly higher in CAPAN1 cells
at 24 hours (p=0.03) and 48 hours (p=0.05) compared to PANC1
cells.
B.
γH2AX immunocytochemistry. After 24 treatment
with 10μM of inhibitor-1, γH2AX positive cells are more
(p=0.05) in CAPAN1 cells compared to PANC1 cells(UT= untreated,
T = treated).
C.
Inhibitor-1 induces synthetic lethality in
MDA-MB-436 cells compared to MCF-7 cells.
D.
NU1025 induces similar
synthetic lethality in MDA-MB-436 cells compared to MCF-7 cells.
E.
Neutral COMET assay was performed as described in methods at various time
points. Mean tail moment was higher in MDA-MB-436 cells at 24 hours
(p=0.002) and 48 hours (p=0.005) compared to MCF-7 cells.
F.
γH2AX immunocytochemistry. After 24 treatment with
10μM of inhibitor-1, γH2AX positive cells are more
(p=0.05) in MDA-MB-436 cells compared to MCF-7 (UT= untreated, T
= treated).
We then examined lethality in BRCA1 deficient human breast cancer cells.
Figure 5C
demonstrates that inhibitor-1
is more toxic to MDA-MB-436 cells (BRCA1 deficient) than MCF-7 cells (BRCA1
proficient). As a positive control, we tested NU1025 (PARP inhibitor) and
demonstrated similar lethality (
Figure 5D
).
We then performed neutral comet assays to evaluate DSB accumulation (
Figure 5E
). The mean tail moment was higher
in MDA-MB-436 cells at 24 hours (p=0.002) and 48 hours (p=0.005)
post-treatment (inhibitor-1) in comparison to MCF-7 cells. These results
demonstrate that BRCA deficient human cancer cells accumulate DSBs after
exposure to an APE1 inhibitor compared to BRCA proficient cells. γH2AX
immunocytochemistry was performed as described previously.
Figure 5F
summarises the results for cells treated
with 10 μM of inhibitor-1. In MCF-7 cells, the mean γH2AX
positive cells was 5 in pre-treatment cells and increased to 7 after a 24 hours
treatment with 10 μM of inhibitor-1. In MDA-MB-436 cells, the mean
γH2AX positive cells was 4 in pre-treatment cells and increased to 11
after 24 hours treatment with 10 μM of inhibitor-1 (p=0.05).
The data presented in human cancer cell lines concurs with the results
using CH cells. The findings in their entirety provide compelling evidence that
APE1 inhibitors induce synthetic lethality in BRCA 1 deficient and BRCA 2
deficient cells by interfering with AP site processing and thereby driving DSB
formation and cell death.Discussion
BER is essential for processing base damage induced by alkylating agents and
radiation. AP sites are obligatory cytotoxic repair intermediates in BER formed
after excision by a DNA glycosylase and are subsequently processed by human APE1
34
,
35
. Preclinical and clinical studies have
confirmed that APE1 is a promising target for drug development in cancer
1
. Multiple drug discovery programmes
have been initiated and several novel small molecule inhibitor compounds of APE1
have been identified
21
-
24
. In previous studies, we have shown that
APE1 inhibitors potentiate the cytotoxicity of alkylating agents, such as
temozolomide, in cancer cell lines
21
-
24
.
Preclinical and clinical studies have confirmed the ability of PARP
inhibitors, which block a subpathway of BER, to induce synthetic lethality in BRCA
deficient breast and ovarian cancers
3
-
5
. Although a model
has been proposed whereby inhibition of SSB repair leads to the excessive formation
of DSBs upon replication fork collapse and cellular lethality, this model is far
from complete
7
. Recent studies
have also challenged the targeting of PARP. For instance, the PARP superfamily of
enzymes includes at least 17 members that have different structures and functions
36
,
37
. Moreover, PARP1 appears to be essential for
the repair of SSBs, yet has other functions including roles in nucleotide excision
repair, telomere length maintenance and organisation of the spindle apparatus. PARP2
is also involved in DNA repair as well as gene transcription and T-cell development
38
The functions of other
PARP superfamily enzymes in DNA repair and other cellular pathways remains less
clear
37
.
PARP enzymes utilize NAD+ (nicotinamide adenine dinucleotide) as a
substrate to catalyze the formation of large branched chains of poly(ADP)-ribose on
several acceptor proteins including those involved in DNA damage repair and
chromatin remodeling. PARP inhibitors under clinical development compete with
endogenous NAD+ for active site binding. However, the specificity of several
PARP inhibitors currently undergoing clinical development remains unclear, and some
inhibitors not only block PARP1 but also PARP2 and other members of the superfamily
36
,
37
. Given the large PARP superfamily and the
number of unrelated proteins that also utilize NAD+, concerns regarding
non-specific activity and long term toxicity of PARP inhibitors has emerged
36
,
38
-
40
.
Nevertheless, evidence from studies of PARP inhibitors suggests that other targets
specific to BER are likely to be promising candidates for drug development.
APE1 inhibition in cells leads to AP site accumulation. AP sites are
cytotoxic by virtue of replication fork blockage, generation of SSBs and DSBs.
Clearly in somatic cancer cells this will be of therapeutic value. Although there is
possibility of ‘off-target’ activity, our data that APE1 inhibitors
result in AP site accumulation (as assessed by aldehyde reactive probe assay) and
previous studies of APE1 depletion by siRNA/shRNA/anti-sense oligonucleotide
1
demonstrating AP site
accumulation and reduced cell viability implies that our data is consistent with
previous observations. AP site quantification is a robust assay for target
inhibition
in vivo
and holds promise as a biomarker of target
activity
in vivo
. We speculate that aldehyde reactive probe assays
can be performed either in peripheral blood mononuclear cells (as a surrogate
biomarker) or in tumour tissue sampled after exposure to APE1 inhibitors in
xenograft studies and possibly in future early phase human trials of APE1
inhibitors.
As the DNA repair domain of APE1 is highly specific to BER, we hypothesised
that APE1 is a promising alternative synthetic lethality target and could
potentially bypass many of the challenges concerning the development of PARP
inhibitors. We demonstrate herein that APE1 inhibitors are synthetically lethal in
BRCA deficient and ATM deficient cells. We have concluded synthetic lethality for
the following reasons. First, in a CH cell system that expresses a dominant-negative
form of APE1 we observed increased sensitivity to DSB repair inhibitors, a
phenomenon also seen in a human cancer cell line deficient in APE1. Second,
functional analyses in DSB repair deficient CH and human cells confirmed that
inhibitors against APE1 led to an accumulation of AP sites, elevated DNA DSBs,
and/or arrest of G2/M cell cycle progression. Weigent et al
28
reported the generation of BRCA2 revertants.
V-C8 cells display non-sense mutation in Brca2, one in exon 15 and another in
exon-16, both resulting in a truncated Brca-2 protein. Mitomycin-c resistant clones
were generated from V-C8 cells in that study
28
. V-C8(Rev1) clones were isolated that had restoration of
one of the brca2 alleles. Although the Brca2 heterozygote
[V-C8(Rev1)] did not gain the entire wild-type phenotype in that
study, the inability of APE1 inhibitors to induce selective toxicity in the Brca2
heterozygote [V-C8(Rev1)] cells compared to VC8 in our study implies
that endogenous BRCA2 in this heterozygote is sufficient to allow DSB repair and to
rescue the synthetic lethality phenotype. This data is consistent with the
preclinical studies that employed PARP inhibitors using BRCA deficient cell systems
3
,
4
. VC8 cells were BRCA2 corrected using a BAC with the murine
Brca2 gene in the Bryant et al study
3
. VC8-B2 cell which was BRCA2 proficient was compared to VC8
cells. In contrast to VC8-B2 cells, BRCA2 deficient VC8 cells were hypersensitive to
PARP inhibitors in that study
3
.
Thus, our study provides not only confirmation that BER inhibition is responsible
for the synthetic lethality observed with DSB repair deficient cells treated with
PARP inhibitor, but also evidence that APE1 inhibitors must be evaluated further as
a synthetic lethality strategy in
in vivo
models . We present a
working model for APE1 inhibition as a synthetic lethality strategy in DSB deficient
cells. In brief, APE1 inhibition leads to AP site accumulation, which results in the
indirect generation of SSBs that are eventually converted to toxic DSBs at
replication forks. In cells deficient in DSB repair, DSBs would persist and lead to
the observed synthetic lethality. In cells that are proficient in DSB repair, DSBs
would be repaired and cells would survive.
Aberrant vasculature and oxygen starvation results in acute/chronic tumour
hypoxia. Tumour hypoxia is a feature of common solid tumours such as breast, lung
and colorectal cancers. Hypoxia in the tumour microenvironment promotes anaerobic
glycolysis and lactic acid accumulation leading to a low extracellular pH and an
acidic microenvironment. A recent study highlighted the critical role of BER in
cancer cell survival in acidic tumour microenvironments
41
. An acidic microenvironment enhances
oxidative stress which results in oxidative base damage that leads to the
up-regulation of BER factors such as APE1. An APE1 inhibitor was shown to be more
cytotoxic to cancer cells in the acidic microenvironment in that study
41
. Interestingly, this BER
up-regulation in a hypoxic tumour microenvironment may be coincident with a decrease
in DSB repair, including HR
42
-
44
. Thus, BER up-regulation and HR
depletion may present an opportunity in the more common sporadic solid tumour
microenvironment for synthetic lethality. This has potential for wider clinical
application as current synthetic lethality strategies are only applicable to tumours
from patients with germ-line deficiency in the BRCA 1 and BRCA 2 genes. The
mechanistic study presented here provides the first preclinical proof that APE1 is a
promising new synthetic lethality target and that APE1 inhibitors could have
significant translational clinical applications in patients.Supplementary Material
Supp Fig S1
Supplemental Figure 1.
A. Neutral COMET assay was
performed as described in methods at various time points. Mean tail moment
was higher in V-E5 cells at 24 hours (p=0.006) and 48 hours
(p=0.001) compared to V-79 cells.
B.
γH2AX
immunocytochemistry. After 24 treatment with 10μM of inhibitor-1,
γH2AX positive cells are more (p=0.03) in V-E5 cells
compared to, V79 cells (UT= untreated, T = treated).
C.
MTS proliferation assay showing that V-C8 cells have
reduced viability and proliferation compared to V-C8(Rev1) and V-79 cells.
D.
Clonogenic survival assays preformed with KU55933 at the
indicated concentrations.
E.
Clonogenic survival assays
preformed with NU7441 at the indicated concentrations.
Click here to view.
(241K, TIF)
Supp Fig S2
Supplemental Figure 2.
ED expression induces increased
cellular lethality in the presence of DNA DSB repair inhibitors. E8 T-REx CH
ovary cells were treated with (tet +) or without (tet -)
tetracycline for 24 hours (see Materials and Methods); tetracycline induces
ED protein expression (see panel D). Subsequently, NU7441 (A), KU55933 (B),
or Wortmannin (C) was added and incubated at the indicated concentrations as
described in Materials and Methods. Shown are the averages and standard
deviations of six independent data points from a single colony formation
experiment. (D) Western blot analysis for ED protein expression in the
presence (+) or absence (-) of tetracycline. Included is a positive
human APE1 control protein.
Click here to view.
(142K, TIF)Acknowledgments
This work was supported by the Breast Cancer Campaign, UK, and by the Intramural
Research Program of NIH, National Institute on Aging, USA. M.Z. Mohammed, R Sultana
and S Madhusudan are supported by the University of Nottingham, UK. R. Abbotts is
supported by Medical Research Council, UK.Footnotes
Conflict of interest:
None declared