Depression of p53-independent Akt survival signals in human oral cancer cells
bearing mutated p53 gene after exposure to high-LET radiation

Yosuke Nakagawa a
, Akihisa Takahashi b
, Atsuhisa Kajihara a
, Nobuhiro Yamakawa a
, Yuichiro Imai a
,
Ichiro Ota c
, Noritomo Okamoto c
, Eiichiro Mori d
, Taichi Noda e
, Yoshiya Furusawa f
, Tadaaki Kirita a
,
Takeo Ohnishi d,⇑
aDepartment of Oral and Maxillofacial Surgery, School of Medicine, Nara Medical University, 840 Shijo-cho, Kashihara, Nara 634-8521, Japan
b Advanced Scientific Research Leader Development Unit, Gunma University, 3-39-22 Showa-machi, Maebashi, Gunma 371-8511, Japan
cDepartment of Otorhinolaryngology, School of Medicine, Nara Medical University, 840 Shijo-cho, Kashihara, Nara 634-8521, Japan
dDepartment of Radiation Oncology, School of Medicine, Nara Medical University, 840 Shijo-cho, Kashihara, Nara 634-8521, Japan
eDepartment of Dermatology, School of Medicine, Nara Medical University, 840 Shijo-cho, Kashihara, Nara 634-8521, Japan
f
Heavy-ion Radiobiology Research Group, Research Center for Charged Particle Therapy, National Institute of Radiological Sciences, 4-9-1 Anagawa, Inage-ku, Chiba 263-8555, Japan

article info

Article history:
Received 26 May 2012
Available online 10 June 2012

Keywords:
High LET
Akt
Caspase
Apoptosis
Cell cycle

abstract

Although mutations and deletions in the p53 tumor suppressor gene lead to resistance to low linear
energy transfer (LET) radiation, high-LET radiation efficiently induces cell lethality and apoptosis regardless
of the p53 gene status in cancer cells. Recently, it has been suggested that the induction of p53-independent
apoptosis takes place through the activation of Caspase-9 which results in the cleavage of
Caspase-3 and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP). This study was designed to examine if high-LET
radiation depresses serine/threonine protein kinase B (PKB, also known as Akt) and Akt-related proteins.
Human gingival cancer cells (Ca9–22 cells) harboring a mutated p53 (mp53) gene were irradiated with
2 Gy of X-rays or Fe-ion beams. The cellular contents of Akt-related proteins participating in cell survival
signaling were analyzed with Western Blotting 1, 2, 3 and 6 h after irradiation. Cell cycle distributions
after irradiation were assayed with flow cytometric analysis. Akt-related protein levels decreased when
cells were irradiated with high-LET radiation. High-LET radiation increased G2/M phase arrests and suppressed
the progression of the cell cycle much more efficiently when compared to low-LET radiation.
These results suggest that high-LET radiation enhances apoptosis through the activation of Caspase-3
and Caspase-9, and suppresses cell growth by suppressing Akt-related signaling, even in mp53 bearing
cancer cells.
2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.

1. Introduction

Oral cavity squamous cell carcinoma (OSCC) therapy utilizes
surgical treatment, radiotherapy, chemotherapy, and hyperthermia.
For advanced OSCC cases, combined therapies using these
modalities are required. Many mutations have been reported in
the p53 tumor suppressor gene in advanced human cancers [1].
The p53 gene plays an important role in the pathway which controls
apoptosis, cell growth, and cell proliferation [2–4]. Consequently,
mutations or deletions in the p53 gene can lead to
resistance to cancer therapies such as radiotherapy and chemotherapy
[5]. The involvement of the p53 gene in the sensitivity of
many cell types toward low-LET radiation is well established
[5,6]. High-LET radiation has several advantages in radiotherapy
when compared to low-LET radiation. These include a higher

relative biological effectiveness (RBE), a reduction in the oxygen
enhancement ratio, less variation in cell cycle-related radiosensitivity,
and the existence of less efficient repair mechanisms for cellular
radiation injuries [7–9]. For these reasons, high-LET radiation
induces highly lethal events, even in radio-resistant tumors [10].
Moreover, high-LET radiation possesses excellent dose distribution
properties which are an advantage when compared to low-LET
radiation. High-LET radiation can produce a high dose in a deep
and narrow region when compared to the shallow and broad high
dose region produced by low-LET radiation [7]. This means that
heavy ion beams can severely damage a tumor, and simultaneously
produce fewer deleterious effects, and lead to a reduction of damage
to the surrounding normal tissues. This means that heavy ion
beams can deliver a high dose to a tumor while minimizing the
amount of radiation delivered to surrounding normal tissues. This
property may permit the design of more effective therapeutic
strategies when based on the genetic and molecular events involved
in cell death. Caspases function as components in cell

0006-291X/$ - see front matter
2012 Elsevier Inc. All rights reserved.
http://dx.doi.org/10.1016/j.bbrc.2012.06.004

⇑ Corresponding author. Fax: +81 744 25 3434.
E-mail address: tohnishi@naramed-u.ac.jp (T. Ohnishi).

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 423 (2012) 654–660

Contents lists available at SciVerse ScienceDirect

Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications

journal homepage: www.elsevier.com/locate/ybbrc
signaling events such as apoptosis, cell growth and differentiation
[11]. While Caspases serve as the main effectors of apoptosis, the
mechanisms involved in the activation of the Caspase system after
exposure to high-LET radiation (which are independent of cellular
p53 gene status) are still not well known. Recently, it was reported
that the induction of p53-independent apoptosis was induced
through the activation of Caspase-9 which results in the cleavage
of Caspase-3 and poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase (PARP) [12–14].
The present study was designed to examine the depression of survival
signaling such as Akt and the associated downstream proteins
which are known to inhibit Caspase-9 and promote cell growth.

2. Materials and methods

2.1. Cells

The cell line used in this study is a human squamous cell carcinoma
gingival-derived cell line (Ca9–22) bearing a point mutation
at codon 248 [Arg (CGG) ? Trp (TGG)] in the p53 gene. Ca9–22
cells were obtained from the Japanese Collection of Research Bioresources
(Health Science Research Resources Bank, Osaka, Japan).
The cells were cultured at 37 C in a humidified 5% CO2 incubator,
and were grown in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium containing
10%(v/v) fetal bovine serum, penicillin (50 U/mL), streptomycin
(50 lg/mL) and kanamycin (50 lg/mL).

2.2. Irradiation

Cells were grown exponentially in 25 cm2 flasks (Nunc Roskilde,
Denmark) before irradiation. The cells were irradiated with X-rays
or Fe-ion beams. For X-irradiation (1.7 keV/lm), a 200 kVp X-ray
generator (PANTAK-320S, Shimadzu, Kyoto, Japan) was used with
total filtration of 0.5 mm aluminum plus 0.5 mm copper. The Xray
dose rate was measured with a thimble ionization chamber
(PTW Freiburg, Freiburg, Germany) at the sample position, and
the dose rate was about 1 Gy/min. Fe-ion beams (500 MeV/u,
200 keV/lm) were generated by a heavy ion medical accelerator
at the National Institute of Radiological Sciences in Chiba, Japan.
The flasks were placed in a special rack designed to position them
to obtain a uniform exposure to the beams. The beams across each
sample were uniform and varied by less than ±5% from the intensity
at the center of the flask. Irradiation was conducted using horizontal
heavy-ion beams with a dose rate of approximately 3 Gy/
min, and no binary filter. Kanai et al [15] measured exposures under
these conditions using a calibrated parallel plate ionization
chamber and/or a plastic scintillation counter at the sample
position.

2.3. Cell survival assay

Cell survival was measured using a standard colony forming assay
as previously describe in detail [14]. Three flasks were used for
each experiment, and two or more independent experiments were
repeated for each survival point. Microscopic colonies containing
approximately 50 cells were scored as having grown from single
surviving cells.

2.4. Analysis of apoptosis

After irradiation, attached and floating cells were stained with
0.2 mM Hoechst 33342 (Sigma Chemical Co. St. Louis, MO, USA).
Apoptotic events were scored as previously described in detail
[14]. A minimum of 300 cells was counted in every sample, and
the percentage of apoptotic cells was recorded.

2.5. Analysis of Caspase-3 activity

Cells were incubated for 47 h at 37 C after irradiation. The cells
were then incubated with fluorescein Caspase-3 (Millipore Co.
Billerica, MA, USA) for 1 h at 37 C, and were illuminated under a
yellow light. Measurements were performed according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. The cell suspension was mixed with a propidium
iodide (PI) solution for a final concentration of 1.25 lg/mL.
After filtration through a 35 lm nylon mesh, the samples were
measured for fluorescein using a flow cytometer (Becton-Dickinson,
San Jose, CA, USA). Data were then analyzed from viable Caspase
positive cells.

2.6. Caspase inhibitors

A Caspase-3 inhibitor (z-DEVD-FMK) and a Caspase-8 inhibitor
(z-IETD-FMK) were purchased from Kamiya Biomedical Co., (Seattle,
WA, USA). A Caspase-9 inhibitor (z-LEHD-FMK) was purchased
from R&D systems (Abingdon, UK). Cells were pre-incubated for
2 h in different concentrations of Caspase inhibitors before
irradiation.

2.7. Western Blotting

After irradiation, cells were harvested at the indicated time
points. Western Blotting was carried out as previously described
in detail [14].The membranes were then incubated for 1 h at room
temperature with primary antibodies. Rabbit polyclonal antimTOR,
anti-phospho-mTOR (Ser2448), anti-Akt, anti-phospho-Akt
(Ser473), rabbit monoclonal anti-S6 Ribosomal Protein (rpS6),
and anti-phospho-rpS6 (Ser240/244) were purchased from Cell
Signaling Technology, Inc., (Beverly, MA, USA). Goat polyclonal
anti-Actin antibody (I-19) and mouse monoclonal anti-Survivin
were obtained from Santa Cruz Biotechnology Inc., (Santa Cruz,
CA, USA). Mouse monoclonal anti-cyclin D1 antibody (Ab-3) was
obtained from Calbiochem Inc., (San Diego, CA, USA). Appropriate
horseradish peroxidase-conjugated secondary antibodies of antirabbit
IgG antibody (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech Inc. Piscataway,
NJ, USA) or anti-mouse IgG antibody (Zymed laboratories Inc. San
Francisco, CA, USA) were incubated for 1 h at room temperature.
For visualization of bands, an enhanced chemiluminescence detection
system (Amersham Pharmacia Biotech Inc.) was used according
to the manufacture’s protocol. The amounts of the proteins in
the samples were determined with scanning profiles using the
Scion imaging program (Scion Co. Frederick, MD, USA).

2.8. Cell cycle analysis

After irradiation, attached and floating cells were fixed with
cold 70% methanol and stored at 4 C for 3 days before analysis.
For cell cycle analysis, the cells were incubated for 30 min at room
temperature with 1 mg/mL RNase and 50 lg/mL propidium iodoide
(PI), and were analyzed using a flow cytometer (Becton–Dickinson).
The cell cycle distribution was assayed by determining
the DNA content twice and calculating the average.

3. Results

3.1. Surviving fraction after irradiation

To investigate radiation sensitivity to X-rays and Fe-ion beams,
Ca9–22 cells bearing mp53 were exposed to both types of beams.
The surviving fraction after exposure to 2 Gy of X-rays, 7 Gy of Xrays,
and 2 Gy of Fe-ions beams were 58%, 8%, and 9% when compared
with unirradiated controls (Fig. 1A). The D10 doses were

Y. Nakagawa et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 423 (2012) 654–660 655
about 2 Gy for the Fe-ion beams and 7 Gy for X-rays. The RBE value
for the D10 dose of the Fe-ion beams was approximately 3.5.

3.2. Apoptosis after irradiation

Using Hoechst33342 staining, the kinetics of apoptosis
induction was analyzed at 48 h after exposure to X-rays or Fe-ion
beams. The apoptosis frequencies at equal survival doses (D10)
were 10% for X-rays (7 Gy), and about 16% for Fe-ion beams
(2 Gy). Furthermore, the apoptosis frequency after 2 Gy of X-rays
was approximately 2%. Thus, Fe-ion beams were eight times as
effective as X-rays in inducing apoptosis at an equal dose (Fig. 1B).

3.3. Caspase-3 activity

The activity of Caspase-3 increased in viable cells at 48 h after
irradiation (Fig. 1C). The activities of Caspase-3 after a 2 Gy and
7 Gy X-irradiation were about 10% and 70% of that after a 2 Gy
exposure to Fe-ion beams. To examine how Caspase-3 was activated,
inhibitors of Caspase-3, Caspase-9 and Caspase-8 were used
(Fig. 1D). Cells were pre-incubated for 2 h before irradiation with a
Caspase inhibitor. The activity of Caspase-3 was observed at 48 h
after irradiation with Fe-ion beams in the presence of inhibitors
for Caspase-3, Caspase-9 and Caspase-8 (each at a concentration
of 20 lM). Caspase-3, Caspase-9 and Caspase-8 inhibitors

suppressed the activities of Caspase-3–55%, 63% and 90% compared
to cells grown in the absence of inhibitors, respectively (Fig. 1D).
The Caspase-9 inhibitor suppressed Caspase-3 activation by Feion
beams to a greater extent than the Caspase-8 inhibitor.

3.4. Cellular content of Akt and related proteins after irradiation

The levels of Akt protein decreased to a larger extent after exposure
to Fe-ion beams than after exposure to X-rays (Fig. 2A, B).
Though Akt levels were reduced to about 75% of that in unirradiated
cells at 3 h after X-irradiation, Fe-ion beams caused a reduction
of about 45%. Furthermore, Fe-ion beams apparently reduced
p-Akt more than X-rays (Fig. 2A, C). Moreover, Akt-related proteins
were effectively depressed by Fe-ion beams. X-rays reduced the
cellular contents of the mTOR protein, phospho-mTOR, rpS6, phospho-rpS6
and Survivin to 53%, 81%, 78%, 68% and 78%, respectively,
of the value in unirradiated cells at 3 h after irradiation (Fig. 2D, E).
Fe-ion beams induced a 44% reduction of the mTOR protein, 72% of
phospho-mTOR, 49% of rpS6, 82% of phospho-rpS6 and 28% of Survivin
when compared with X-rays at 3 h after irradiation. At 8 h
after irradiation, cyclin D1 levels were apparently depressed in
the cases of the irradiated cells with X-rays at 7 Gy and Fe-ion
beams at 2 Gy (Fig. 3A), and their relative values were 49% and
37%, respectively, though the value in the irradiated with 2 Gy of
X-rays was 80% (Fig. 3B).

Fig. 1. Sensitivity to X-rays or Fe-ion beams. (A) Surviving rate; (B) Apoptosis frequency. (C and D) Caspase-3 activity after exposure to X-rays or Fe-beams. Caspase-3 activity
was analyzed at 48 h after irradiation in the absence C or presence D of different Caspase inhibitors which act against Caspase-3, Caspase-9, and Caspase-8 at a concentration
of 20 lM. U, non-irradiated cells in A, B and C.

656 Y. Nakagawa et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 423 (2012) 654–660
3.5. Cell cycle distribution

The distribution of the G1, S, and G2/M phases in unirradiated
cells was 43%, 17% and 40%, respectively (Fig. 3C). At 12 h after irradiation
with 2 Gy of X-rays, 7 Gy of X-rays, or 2 Gy of Fe-ion beams,
the G2/M phase cell fraction was 47%, 56% and 56% (Fig. 3D, F, H),
showing that there was a significant accumulation of cells in the
G2/M phase. At 24 h after irradiation with 2 Gy of X-rays, 7 Gy of
X-rays, or 2 Gy of Fe-ion beams, the G2/M phase cell fraction was
35%, 47% and 50% (Fig. 3E, G, I). A G2/M phase arrest was not observed
after 2 Gy of X-rays or in the unirradiated controls, but
was observed 24 h after irradiation with 7 Gy of X-rays and 2 Gy
of Fe-ion beams.

4. Discussion

The p53 gene can play a pivotal role in pathways which control
apoptosis, cell growth, and cell proliferation [2–4]. There is a broad
consensus that the primary physiological role of p53 in DNA damage-induced
apoptosis is to act as a transcriptional activator for
genes which encode apoptotic effectors [16]. Previously reported
cellular sensitivities to radiation were dependent on cellular p53
gene status in human tongue squamous cell carcinomas [2], human
glioblastoma cells [17], and human non-small lung cancer cells
[12]. It was observed that wtp53 cells were about 1.6-fold more
sensitive to X-rays than cells with a dysfunctional p53 status (carrying
mtp53 or deleted p53) in the H1299 human lung cancer cell

Fig. 2. Western Blotting of Akt and downstream proteins. (A) Time course for levels of Akt and Akt phosphorylated (p-) at ser473 after irradiation. (D) Protein levels at 3 h
after irradiation at 2 Gy. (B, C and E) Each band is compared with the individual band density for Actin. The relative amounts of the proteins were calculated by comparing
them with the density of the unirradiated samples (U) in A and D. Black columns indicate X-irradiation; white columns indicate Fe-ion beam irradiation. B, Akt; C, p-Akt; E,
downstream Akt associated proteins.

Y. Nakagawa et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 423 (2012) 654–660 657
Fig. 3. Western Blotting of cyclin D1 and cell cycle analysis. (A) Protein levels of cyclin D1 at 8 h after irradiation. (B) Each band is compared with the individual band density
for Actin. The relative amounts of the proteins were calculated by comparing them with the density of the unirradiated samples (U) in A. Black columns indicate X-irradiation
at 2 Gy; gray columns indicate X-irradiation at 7 Gy; white columns indicate Fe-ion beam irradiation at 2 Gy. (C) Unirradiated controls. (D–G) Cells irradiated with X-rays. (H
and I) Cells irradiated with Fe-ion beams; D, E, H and I, 2 Gy; F and G, 7 Gy. D, F and H, 12 h after irradiation; E, G and I, 24 h after irradiation. In the bottom figures
(distribution); black columns indicate G1; white columns indicate S; gray columns indicate G2/M. C–I show the same samples between in the middle figures (histogram) and
bottom figures.

658 Y. Nakagawa et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 423 (2012) 654–660
line [13]. X-irradiation primarily induced apoptosis and necrosis.
Although there were no significant differences between wtp53
and mp53 cells in the H1299 cell line with respect to the frequency
of X-rays induced necrotic cells, wtp53 cells had a higher proportion
of apoptotic cells after X-rays than the mp53 cells. On the
other hand, there was almost no significant difference in the surviving
fraction or in the proportion of apoptotic cells observed after
exposure to high-LET radiation, regardless of cellular p53 gene status
in cancer cells [12]. These facts suggest that high-LET radiation
induces apoptosis in wtp53 cells and mp53 cells at similar levels.
These findings indicate that the RBE values for Fe-ion beams were
about 5.5 and 2.1 in p53 dysfunctional cells and wtp53 cells,
respectively [13]. In the present paper, it is shown that radiation
sensitivity and apoptosis in Ca9–22 cells apparently increased after
exposure to Fe-ion beams when compared to an equal dose of
X-rays (2 Gy) (Fig. 1A, B and Fig. 4). It has been reported that RBE
curves for both reached a peak at 100 keV/lm [14]. It is often
not practical in the clinic to determine the status of a p53 gene
or other relevant genetic markers. Thus, therapies using high-LET
radiation are expected to result in a higher efficacy in treatments,
especially for malignant tumors bearing a mp53 or a deleted p53
gene status. This is because these cell types have a high possibility
of being radioresistant [10], and high-LET radiation can induce
apoptosis effectively in tumors regardless of p53 gene status
[12,13]. Tumors responsive to C-ion beams have been reported to
include head and neck cancer, lung cancer, liver cancer, prostate
cancer, bone and soft-tissue sarcomas, pelvic recurrences of rectal
cancer, skull base tumors, and choroidal melanoma [18].
During the induction of apoptosis, Caspases act as effectors, and
their activities depend on p53 gene status. Two distinct pathways

upstream of the Caspase cascade have been identified: death
receptor-induced apoptosis and mitochondrial stress-induced
apoptosis [19,20]. Death receptors trigger Caspase-8, while mitochondria
release apoptogenic factors leading to the activation of
Caspase-9. Fe-ion beams apparently increase Caspase-3 activity
in viable cells (Fig. 1C). The activity of Caspase-3 in cells irradiated
with Fe-ion beams was higher than the activity in X-irradiated
cells, not only at equal doses (2 Gy), but also at a D10 dose (7 Gy).
Moreover, apoptosis induced by high-LET radiation appears to be
dependent on Caspases, and Caspase-9 may contribute to Caspase
dependent apoptosis after exposure to high-LET radiation (Fig. 1D
and Fig. 4).
On the other hand, Akt survival signals are a ubiquitous and evolutionarily
conserved signaling cascade that is involved in numerous
cellular functions including apoptosis, cell proliferation, differentiation,
migration, and metabolism [21,22]. Activation of Akt survival
signaling is associated with a poor prognosis inmultiple tumor types
[23,24]. There are three closely related Akt isoforms in mammalian
cells, consisting of Akt1 (PKBa), Akt2 (PKBb), and Akt3 (PKBc) [21].
All Akt isoforms bind to phosphatidylinositol(3,4,5)-triphosphate
(PIP3) through pleckstrin-homology (PH) domains, and translocate
to the plasma membrane where they are activated via phosphorylation
at residues Ser473 and Thr308. When Akt is activated through
phosphorylation, Akt promotes cellular proliferation and inhibits
apoptosis through the phosphorylation of multiple substrates, or
the downstream proteins. These include Caspase-9, Bad, GSK3, and
forkhead transcription factors such as FKHR (FOX1), FKHRL (FOXO3),
and AFX (FOXO4)[22,25]. Recently it was suggested that C-ion beam
irradiation effectively suppresses the metastatic potential of nonsmall
cell lung cancer A549 cells by suppressing the PI3 K/Akt

Fig. 4. A model for high LET radiation-induced p53-independent apoptosis through the enhancement of death signals and the depression of survival signals. An arrow ?
indicates enhancement; a sidewise ‘‘T’’ indicates depression.

Y. Nakagawa et al. / Biochemical and Biophysical Research Communications 423 (2012) 654–660 659
signaling pathway [26]. The work described here was designed to
examine whether high-LET radiation depresses survival signals from
Akt and Akt-related genes which inhibit Caspase-9. The levels of Akt
(Fig. 2A–C and Fig. 4) and the associated downstream proteins
(Fig. 2D, E and Fig. 4) were effectively depressed by high-LET radiation
when compared with low-LET radiation. The lowest level of
Akt proteins was observed at 3 h after irradiation (Fig. 2B).
It has been reported that an mTOR inhibitor, rapamycin, in conjunction
with radiation efficiently suppressed progression of the
cell cycle [27]. After exposure to 7 Gy of X-rays and 2 Gy of Feion
beams, the cell cycle distributions were almost the same at
12 h and 24 h after irradiation (Fig. 3F–I). Moreover, it has been
well known that Akt-related signals control expression of cyclin
D1 and decreased expression of cyclin D1 induced G2/M arrests
[28]. The levels of cyclin D1 (Fig. 3A, B) was effectively depressed
by high-LET radiation when compared with low-LET radiation.
From these results, it was suggested that high-LET radiation increased
G2/M arrests and then, the progression of the cell cycle
was stopped through the depression of Akt-related signaling
(Fig. 4).
Clustered DNA lesions at multiple sites are thought to be critical
for radiation-induced cell death. High-LET radiation is thought to
produce high yields of clustered DNA damage, including DNA double-strand
breaks (DSBs) and base alterations [29]. DSBs were repaired
slowly when compared to the repair of DSBs induced by
X-rays [30–32]. Consequently, cell multiplication was disturbed
at the G2/M stage [33] after exposure to high-LET radiation. In particular,
Fe-ion beam-induced lesions are repaired more slowly than
X-ray-induced lesions, because Fe-ion beam-induced lesions are
reported to be more complex or extensive [32]. There are two major
pathways in mammalian cells to repair DSBs: non-homologous
end-joining (NHEJ) repair and homologous recombination (HR) repair
[34]. Recently it has been reported that exposure to high-LET
radiation induces cell lethality more efficiently than the same dose
of low-LET radiation because NHEJ plays large role in the repair for
low-LET radiation-induced DSBs [32].
In conclusion, the present study suggests that high-LET radiation
such as Fe-ion beams enhance apoptosis through the activation
of Caspase-3 and Caspase-9 via the depression of Akt-related
signaling, even in mp53 cancer cells (Fig. 4). These results clearly
show that high-LET radiation is able to induce cell death efficiently
with a higher level of apoptosis than X-rays, regardless of p53 gene
status. More detailed studies are still necessary to define the initial
events occurring during the depression of Akt survival signaling
and of the effect of p53 gene status after exposure to high-LET
radiation.

5. Conflict of interest statement

The authors declare that they have no conflicts of interest associated
with this work.

