Full Terms & Conditions of access and use can be found at
https://www.tandfonline.com/action/journalInformation?journalCode=kaup20

Autophagy

ISSN: 1554-8627 (Print) 1554-8635 (Online) Journal homepage: www.tandfonline.com/journals/kaup20

MTOR inhibition attenuates DNA damage
and apoptosis through autophagy-mediated
suppression of CREB1

Ying Wang, Zhongdong Hu, Zhibo Liu, Rongrong Chen, Haiyong Peng, Jing
Guo, Xinxin Chen & Hongbing Zhang

To cite this article: Ying Wang, Zhongdong Hu, Zhibo Liu, Rongrong Chen, Haiyong Peng, Jing
Guo, Xinxin Chen & Hongbing Zhang (2013) MTOR inhibition attenuates DNA damage and
apoptosis through autophagy-mediated suppression of CREB1, Autophagy, 9:12, 2069-2086,
DOI: 10.4161/auto.26447

To link to this article: https://doi.org/10.4161/auto.26447

View supplementary material

Published online: 01 Nov 2013.

Submit your article to this journal

Article views: 5130

View related articles

Citing articles: 6 View citing articles
©2013 Landes Bioscience. Do not distribute.

 Basic Research Paper

www.landesbioscience.com Autophagy 2069

Autophagy 9:12, 2069–2086; December 2013; © 2013 Landes Bioscience
Basic Research Paper

Introduction

Inappropriate cellular responses to stress changes within and
outside the cells may facilitate the development of many tumors.
The MTOR (mechanistic target of rapamycin) serves as a major
effector that regulates diverse key cellular processes, such as
cell growth,1
 differentiation,2
 metabolism,3
 and autophagy.4
Dysregulation of MTOR signaling caused by loss-of-function
mutations of tumor suppressors including PTEN (phosphatase
and tensin homolog),5
 TSC (tuberous sclerosis complex)1/2,6-11

or STK11/LKB1 (serine/threonine kinase 11),12 and gain-offunction
mutations of proto-oncogenes such as PI3K (phosphoinositide
3-kinase)13 or AKT (v-akt murine thymoma viral
oncogene homolog 1)7,13 is a frequent event in human cancers.14
Thus, MTOR is presented as an attractive target for cancer therapy.
Rapamycin, a highly specific inhibitor of MTOR, has been
shown as a therapeutic reagent for cancers driven by aberrant
activation of MTOR signaling.15 However, rapamycin also promotes
the survival of chemotherapeutics treated cells through
some underlying mechanisms such as AMPK-dependent

*Correspondence to: Hongbing Zhang; Email: hbzhang@ibms.pumc.edu.cn or hbzhang2006@gmail.com
Submitted: 01/12/2013; Revised: 09/03/2013; Accepted: 09/10/2013
http://dx.doi.org/10.4161/auto.26447

MTOR inhibition attenuates DNA damage
and apoptosis through autophagy-mediated
suppression of CREB1

Ying Wang, Zhongdong Hu, Zhibo Liu, Rongrong Chen, Haiyong Peng, Jing Guo, Xinxin Chen, and Hongbing Zhang*

State Key Laboratory of Medical Molecular Biology; Department of Physiology; Institute of Basic Medical Sciences and School of Basic Medicine; Graduate School of Peking
Union Medical College; Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences and Peking Union Medical College; Beijing, China

Keywords: apoptosis, autophagy, cAMP response element-binding protein 1, chemoresistance, DNA damage, mechanistic target of
rapamycin
Abbreviations: ATG5, autophagy-related 5; ATG7, autophagy-related 7; CREB1, cAMP responsive element binding protein 1;
DAPI, 4´, 6´-diamidino-2-phenylindole; DMSO, dimethyl sulfoxide; DSBs, double-strand breaks; FACS, fluorescence-activated
cell sorting; FITC, fluorescein isothiocyanate; LC3, microtubule-associated protein 1 light chain 3; 3-MA, 3-methyladenine;
MEFs, mouse embryonic fibroblasts; MTOR, mechanistic target of rapamycin; MTT, 3-[4, 5-dimethyl-thiazol-2yl] 2,
5-diphenyltetrazoliumbromide; PARP1, poly (ADP-ribose) polymerase 1; PCR, polymerase chain reaction; PBS, phosphatebuffered
saline; PI, propidium iodide; PTEN, phosphatase and tensin homolog; siRNA, small interfering RNA; SQSTM1,
sequestosome 1; TSC, tuberous sclerosis complex; WT, wild type

Hyperactivation of mechanistic target of rapamycin (MTOR) is a common feature of human cancers, and MTOR
inhibitors, such as rapamycin, are thus becoming therapeutics in targeting certain cancers. However, rapamycin has
also been found to compromise the efficacy of chemotherapeutics to cells with hyperactive MTOR. Here, we show
that loss of TSC 2 or PTEN enhanced etoposide-induced DNA damage and apoptosis, which was blunted by suppression
of MTOR with either rapamycin or RNA interference. cAMP response element-binding protein 1 (CREB1), a nuclear
transcription factor that regulates genes involved in survival and death, was positively regulated by MTOR in mouse
embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs) and cancer cell lines. Silencing Creb1 expression with siRNA protected MTOR-hyperactive
cells from DNA damage-induced apoptosis. Furthermore, loss of TSC 2 or PTEN impaired either etoposide or nutrient
starvation-induced autophagy, which in turn, leads to CREB1 hyperactivation. We further elucidated an inverse correlation
between autophagy activity and CREB1 activity in the kidney tumor tissue obtained from a TSC patient and
the mouse livers with hepatocyte-specific knockout of PTEN. CREB1 induced DNA damage and subsequent apoptosis
in response to etoposide in autophagy-defective cells. Reactivation of CREB1 or inhibition of autophagy not only
improved the efficacy of rapamycin but also alleviated MTOR inhibition-mediated chemoresistance. Therefore, autophagy
suppression of CREB1 may underlie the MTOR inhibition-mediated chemoresistance. We suggest that inhibition
of MTOR in combination with CREB1 activation may be used in the treatment of cancer caused by an abnormal PI3KPTEN-AKT-TSC
1/2-MTOR signaling pathway. CREB1 activators should potentiate the efficacy of chemotherapeutics in
treatment of these cancers.
©2013 Landes Bioscience. Do not distribute.

2070 Autophagy Volume 9 Issue 12

inactivation of TP53/p5316 and increased activation of survival
kinases.17-19
CREB1 (cAMP responsive element binding protein 1) is a
nuclear transcription factor which regulates target genes involved
in cell survival and cell death. Upon the activation of cAMPdependent
signal transduction, CREB1 is activated via phosphorylation
at Ser133 by PRKA.20,21 Overexpression and hyperactivation
of CREB1 are often observed in acute myeloid leukemia22,23 and
several human solid malignancies such as breast,24 lung,25 ovary,26
and prostate27 carcinomas. Inhibition of CREB1 in several
human cancer cell lines causes induction of apoptosis and suppression
of cell proliferation,22,28 indicative of its critical role as
a proto-oncogene. Conversely, several studies have demonstrated
that stimulation of cAMP pathway inhibits proliferation of some
human cancer cell lines28 and induces apoptosis of Ras-mutated
melanoma cell lines.29 In addition, CREB1 activation, due to dysfunction
in mitochondria, impairs cell proliferation.30 Therefore,
the precise role of CREB1 in cancer development is still uncertain.
Furthermore, neither its role in cancer therapy nor the mechanism
governing its activity and expression in cancer is fully understood.

Autophagy is a self-cannibalization process that begins with
sequestering cell structures in double-membrane vesicles (autophagosomes),
and then targets them for degradation by fusion
of autophagosomes and lysosomes (autolysosomes).31 This “selfeating”
process exerts important roles in many aspects of physiology
and pathology, including intracellular homeostasis, cell
death, tumor suppression, and aging.32,33 Recently, it has been
reported that induction of autophagy is frequently observed
in many human cancer cell lines treated with chemotherapeutics.34-36
However, whether autophagy induced by chemotherapy
acts as a protective mechanism that allows treated cancer cells
to survive or rather as an alternative cell death-inducing process
has been an issue of great controversy. Although MTOR plays an
inhibitory role in regulation of autophagy, little is known about
the role of autophagy in the chemotherapy of cancers driven by
aberrant activation of MTOR signaling.
In this study, we sought to explore the mechanism by which
MTOR inhibition results in chemoresistance. We identified
CREB1 as a new target involved in MTOR-modulated autophagy
signaling cascade and found that autophagy impairment

Figure 1A and B. Hyperactive MTOR sensitizes TSC 2- or PTEN-deficient cells to etoposide-mediated DNA damage and apoptosis. (A) Reduced viability
of tsc2−/−
 or pten−/−
 MEFs treated with etoposide. tsc2−/−
 or pten−/−
 MEFs and their WT counterparts were treated with etoposide for 48 h at the indicated
concentration. Cell viability was determined with the MTT assay. **P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. (B) Loss of TSC 2 or PTEN increased etoposide-induced apoptosis
as illustrated by an increase of total ANXA5-positive cells (LR+UR quadrants). After etoposide treatment for 24 h, apoptosis induction was analyzed by
FACS . Cells in the LR (lower right) and UR (upper right) quadrants were considered early apoptotic (ANXA5-FITC positive, PI negative), late apoptotic, and
necrotic (ANXA5-FITC positive, PI positive), respectively.
©2013 Landes Bioscience. Do not distribute.

www.landesbioscience.com Autophagy 2071

due to constitutive MTOR activation
is sufficient to trigger
CREB1 phosphorylation and
accumulation. Under conditions
of etoposide-induced genomic
damage, CREB1 activation
induced by impaired autophagy
had a growth disadvantage and
an enhanced DNA damage in
MTOR-hyperactivated cells.
Therefore, MTOR inhibitionmediated
chemoresistance is a
result of CREB1 suppression
via induction of autophagy. Our
findings may have therapeutic
implication for the treatment of cancers driven by aberrant activation
of MTOR signaling.

Results

Inhibition of MTOR induces resistance to etoposide
The PTEN and TSC1/2 tumor suppressor proteins tightly
control MTOR activity. Loss of these tumor suppressors leads to
constitutive MTOR activation. To investigate MTOR inhibitionmediated
effect on cell survival in response to chemotherapy, we
treated tsc2−/−
 and pten−/−
 mouse embryonic fibroblasts (MEFs)
with 0.04 to 40 μM of etoposide for 48 h. Compared with that
of wild-type (WT) MEFs, the viability of tsc2−/−
 and pten−/−
 MEFs
were significantly decreased by etoposide in a dose-dependent
manner (Fig. 1A). Similarly, cells deficient in TSC2 or PTEN
are more sensitive to cisplatin treatment than WT cells (Fig. S1).
DNA-damaging agents can induce cell death via either apoptosis
or necrosis. To determine whether hyperactive MTORenhanced
etoposide-induced global cell death is apoptotic or
necrotic, we analyzed cell death by using ANXA5/annexin

A5-FITC/propidium iodide (PI) staining followed by flow
cytometry. Since the dying cells induced by etoposide were
mainly stained by ANXA5 and not PI, the cell death was thus
predominately apoptotic (Fig. 1B). Consistent with their etoposide-sensitive
phenotype (Fig. 1A), MTOR-hyperactivated cells
showed higher apoptotic rate in response to etoposide, comparing
to their control WT cells. To determine the extent of induction of
apoptosis and confirm the FACS analysis results, we further analyzed
a biochemical hallmark of apoptosis—PARP1 [poly (ADPribose)
polymerase 1] cleavage. PARP1 is an abundant nuclear
protein and its roles in various DNA metabolic activities are well
established. It is cleaved in apoptotic cells by CASP3 (caspase 3)37
in response to many DNA-damaging agents including etoposide.
Consistent with the FACS data, higher level of cleaved PARP1
was observed in MTOR-hyperactivated cells, compared with that
in WT cells (Fig. 1C).
Since etoposide is an inducer of double-strand breaks (DSBs)
in DNA, we proposed that constitutive MTOR activation could
facilitate cell death induced by chemotherapy through persistent
DNA damage response. Detection and visualization of H2AFX

Figure  1C and D. Hyperactive
MTOR sensitizes TSC 2- or PTENdeficient
cells to etoposidemediated
DNA damage and
apoptosis. (C) Loss of TSC 2 or PTEN
led to increased accumulation of
γ-H2A.X protein and PARP1 cleavage
after 24 h etoposide treatment.
(D) tsc2−/−
 or pten−/−
 MEFs accumulated
more γ-H2A.X foci post-etoposide
treatment. Cells were fixed
and stained with anti-γ-H2A.X antibody
and the etoposide-induced
foci (green) were visualized with
immunofluorescence. DNA was
counterstained with DAPI (blue).
Representative images are shown.
The γ-H2A.X foci were quantified
by counting at least 200 cells and
the numbers of the foci between
WT and tsc2−/−
 or pten−/−
 MEFs
treated with etoposide were then
compared.
©2013 Landes Bioscience. Do not distribute.

2072 Autophagy Volume 9 Issue 12

phosphorylated on Ser139 (γ-H2A.X) by western blotting and
immunofluorescence were performed to assess DNA DSBs38
after chemotherapy in MTOR-hyperactivated cells. As shown in
Figure 1C, treatment of all types of cells with etoposide led to an
increase of γ-H2A.X protein 24 h post-chemotherapeutic reagent
administration. However, the level of γ-H2A.X expression was
much higher in tsc2−/−
 or pten−/−
 MEFs than in WT MEFs. In
addition, both of WT MEFs and MTOR-hyperactivated MEFs
showed very few γ-H2A.X foci without etoposide treatment,
while the foci increased significantly in all types of cells in the
presence of etoposide. However, more than 60% WT MEFs
had < 10 foci per cell, whereas approximately 60% MTORhyperactivated
MEFs had > 30 foci per cell (Fig. 1D).
Moreover, preinhibition of MTOR by rapamycin increased the
cell viability (Fig. 2A) and decreased the apoptotic rate (Fig. 2B)
of tsc2−/−
 or pten−/−
 MEFs treated with etoposide. As expected,

Figure  2A–C. Suppression of
MTOR protects cells from DNA
damage-induced apoptosis.
tsc2−/−
 or pten−/−
 MEFs were pretreated
with or without 10 nM
rapamycin for 6 h (A–C), or were
transfected with nontargeting
control siRNA or Mtor-specific
siRNA (D–F) before they were
exposed to etoposide. MTOR
suppression by rapamycin (A)
or specific siRNA (D) increased
the viability of cells after etoposide
treatment. Cell viability was
analyzed with the MTT assay.
**P < 0.01, ***P < 0.001. FACS
analysis showed that either
rapamycin pretreatment (B) or
MTOR knockdown (E) protected
against etoposide-induced
apoptosis. Cells gated in LR and
UR quadrants were considered
apoptotic. Immunoblotting
analysis revealed that rapamycin
(C) or MTOR knockdown
(F) suppressed the induction
of γ-H2A.X protein and PARP1
cleavage in tsc2−/−
 or pten−/−
 MEFs
24 h post-etoposide treatment.

the level of γ-H2A.X expression
and cleaved PARP1 were
greatly reduced in tsc2−/−
 or
pten−/−
 MEFs treated with
etoposide when MTOR was
preinhibited by rapamycin
(Fig. 2C). To confirm the cell
responses caused by inhibition
of MTOR, specific siRNA
targeted against Mtor was used
to reduce MTOR in tsc2−/−
 or
pten−/−
 MEFs. Consistent with
rapamycin’s effect on tsc2−/−
 or
pten−/−
 MEFs, MTOR knockdown
protected these cells
from etoposide-induced apoptotic cell death, as evidenced by elevation
of cell viability (Fig. 2D) and reduction of apoptotic rate
(Fig. 2E), γ-H2A.X expression and cleaved PARP1 (Fig. 2F).
Taken together, these results indicated that constitutive MTOR
activation sensitizes cells to DNA damage-induced apoptotic cell
death, while inhibition of MTOR reduces etoposide-induced
DNA damage and therefore induces resistance to etoposide.
MTOR enhances etoposide-induced CREB1 activation
An inverse correlation has been found between STK11 protein
levels and CREB1 activity,39,40 suggesting a role of STK11
in the activation of CREB1 signaling. In addition, loss of STK11
can lead to constitutive activation of MTOR.12 We speculated
that there might be a link between MTOR and CREB1 signaling.
To explore whether CREB1 was involved in MTOR regulation
of DNA damage, we determined the activity of CREB1
©2013 Landes Bioscience. Do not distribute.

www.landesbioscience.com Autophagy 2073

in response to chemotherapy
by examining its phosphorylation
and accumulation in
WT MEFs and MTORhyperactivated
MEFs. As
represented in Figure 3A, in
response to etoposide treatment,
phosphorylation of
CREB1 on Ser133 and accumulation
of total CREB1 protein
were markedly induced in
tsc2−/−
 MEFs. Moreover, the
phosphorylation and accumulation
of CREB1 were
reduced by rapamycin with
or without etoposide treatment
(Fig. 3B). Similar findings
were also obtained from
pten−/−
 MEFs (Fig. 3C and D).
In addition, cisplatin treatment
also resulted in a dramatic
activation of CREB1
in the MEFs with MTOR
hyperactivation due to deletion
of either Tsc2 or Pten, in
comparison with WT MEFs
(Fig. S2). Other than MEFs,
we evaluated the regulation of
MTOR on CREB1 activation
in 3 cancer cell lines as well as
a TSC2-deficient ELT-3 cell
line derived from a uterine
leiomyoma in an Eker rat with a germline insertion in the Tsc2
gene.41,42 As shown in Figure 3E, rapamycin reduced the phosphorylation
and accumulation of CREB1 in all cell lines. The
inhibitory effect of rapamycin on the phosphorylation and accumulation
of CREB1 indicates that the different state of MTOR
activation was responsible for the differential response of CREB1
to chemotherapy between WT MEFs and tsc2−/−
 or pten−/−
 MEFs.
Furthermore, we found that knockdown of MTOR in tsc2−/−
 or
pten−/−
 cells significantly reduced the phosphorylation and accumulation
of CREB1 protein with or without etoposide treatment
(Fig. 3F). The reduced CREB1 activation caused by MTOR
knockdown further supports our finding that MTOR positively
regulates CREB1 activity.

To ensure that phosphorylated CREB1 is capable of regulating
gene expression, we examined the expression of c-FOS (FOS),
a CREB1-regulated immediate-early gene.43 As can be seen in
Figure 4A, etoposide-induced Fos mRNA expression was reversed
by rapamycin in tsc2−/−
 MEFs. Consistently, in response to etoposide,
the protein level of FOS was also greatly increased, and
was markedly reduced by rapamycin treatment in tsc2−/−
 MEFs
(Fig. 4B). Furthermore, the overexpression of M1-CREB1, a dominant-negative
mutant for CREB1,44 significantly inhibited the
phosphorylation of endogenous CREB1 and the protein level of
FOS (Fig. 4C). Taken together, these data suggest that MTOR is a
positive regulator of CREB1 activity and CREB1 may play a role in
MTOR regulation of etoposide-induced DNA damage response.

Figure  2D–F. tsc2−/−
 or pten−/−
MEFs were transfected with
nontargeting control siRNA
or Mtor-specific siRNA (D–F)
before they were exposed to
etoposide. MTOR suppression
by specific siRNA (D) increased
the viability of cells after etoposide
treatment. For more information,
see the Figure  2A–C
legend.
©2013 Landes Bioscience. Do not distribute.

2074 Autophagy Volume 9 Issue 12

MTOR promotes etoposideinduced
DNA damage response
through activation of CREB1
cAMP, which can trigger the
activation of CREB1, has been
reported to sensitize cells to proapoptotic
agents.29 Moreover,
CREB1 has been implicated in the
enhanced expression of CCND1
(cyclin D1),45 BID,46 TP53,
and CDKN1A/p21.30,47 Since
cAMP, CCND1, BID, TP53, and
CDKN1A are involved in the DNA
damage response,46,48-51 we proposed
that the enhanced phosphorylation
and accumulation of CREB1
might be necessary to mediate
the effect of constitutive MTOR
activation on DNA damage and
subsequent apoptosis in response
to etoposide. By silencing Creb1
gene expression with RNA interference
in MTOR-hyperactivated
MEFs, we found that suppression
of CREB1 inhibited hyperactive
MTOR-enhanced DNA damage as
evidenced by decreased γ-H2A.X
expression (Fig. 5A) and promoted
cell survival in the presence of etoposide
(Fig. 5B). We next demonstrated
that suppression of CREB1
attenuated DNA damage-induced
apoptosis of MTOR-hyperactivated
cells, as manifested by fewer
ANXA5-positive cells (Fig. 5C)
and decreased PARP1 cleavage
(Fig. 5A) in CREB1 knockdown
cells than in control cells.
To exclude the possibility that
CREB1 is functionally distinct
in promotion of DNA damageinduced
apoptosis of MEFs in our
study, we examined CREB1’s effect
on DNA damage-induced apoptosis
in TSC2-deficient ELT-3 cells.
When CREB1 was knocked down
in ELT-3 cells, γ-H2A.X induction
and PARP1 cleavage were inhibited
(Fig. 5D) and ANXA5-positive
cells were decreased (Fig. 5E). In
addition, we used a specific activator
of CREB1 to confirm that
activation of CREB1 was able to
trigger apoptosis induced by etoposide.
When CREB1 was stimulated
in WT MEFs with forskolin,

Figure 3. CREB1 activation in response to etoposide depended on MTOR. Total protein lysates were harvested
from cells for immunoblotting (A–F). Loss of TSC 2 (A) or PTEN (C) led to enhanced phosphorylation
and accumulation of CREB1 protein after 24 h of etoposide treatment. Rapamycin pretreatment reduced
the phosphorylation and accumulation of CREB1 protein in tsc2−/−
 (B) or pten−/−
 MEFs (D) with or without
etoposide treatment for 24 h. (E) MTOR positively regulated the phosphorylation and accumulation of
CREB1 in cancer cell lines. Cells were treated with or without 10 nM rapamycin for 6 h. (F) MTOR knockdown
suppressed the phosphorylation and accumulation of CREB1 in tsc2−/−
 or pten−/−
 MEFs with or without etoposide
treatment.
©2013 Landes Bioscience. Do not distribute.

www.landesbioscience.com Autophagy 2075

a cAMP agonist, DNA damage-induced apoptotic cell death
was enhanced, as evidenced by reduced cell viability, and elevated
γ-H2A.X induction, PARP1 cleavage and apoptotic rate
(Fig. 5F–H). Taken together, these data demonstrate that hyperactive
MTOR promotes etoposide-induced DNA damage via
increased CREB1 activity.
MTOR activates etoposide-induced CREB1 through suppression
of autophagy
Since autophagy signaling is downstream of MTOR, CREB1
might be modulated by MTOR through suppression of autophagy.
To explore the role of autophagy in the regulation of
CREB1 activity, we first examined the effect of etoposide on
the induction of autophagy in tsc2−/−
, pten−/−
, and WT MEFs.
Redistribution of the autophagy protein LC3 from a diffused
staining pattern throughout the cytoplasm and nucleus to cytoplasmic
puncta is a hallmark of autophagy induction (formation
of autophagosomes).52 As evident from Figure 6A, all types of
MEFs showed diffused distribution of LC3 in the absence of etoposide
under a fluorescence microscope. However, treatment of
etoposide increased LC3 puncta in number and intensity in WT
MEFs rather than in tsc2−/−
 or pten−/−
 MEFs. For quantification
of the induction of autophagic cells, at least 200 cells of each
type were counted for every treatment. As shown in Figure 6B,
more than 80% of WT MEFs treated with etoposide showed
LC3 puncta, while these autophagic features were observed in
less than 20% of MTOR-hyperactivated MEFs. Since the accumulation
of autophagosomes may represent either the increased

generation of autophagosomes or a blockade in autophagosome
maturation, autophagosome formation does not always indicate
increased autophagic activity.52 Hence, expression of sequestosome
1/p62 (SQSTM1) that inversely correlates with autophagic
activity was also examined. Consistent with increased autophagosomes
in WT MEFs after the treatment with etoposide,
SQSTM1 was markedly decreased in WT MEFs. In contrast,
SQSTM1 degradation was not observed in tsc2−/−
 or pten−/−
 MEFs
treated with etoposide, indicating that autophagy in these cells
is defective (Fig. 6C). In addition, the autophagic flux observed
in WT MEFs was also measured by inferring LC3-II turnover
in the presence or absence of lysosomal degradation.53 By using
immunoblotting analysis, we found that etoposide induced
LC3-II in WT cells but not TSC2-deficient cells (Fig. S3). This
was further verified by inhibition of the “autophagic flux” with
bafilomycin A1
, which prevents maturation of autophagic vacuoles
by inhibiting fusion of autophagosomes and lysosomes,54
resulting in a further accumulation of LC3-II in WT cells (Fig.
S3). Furthermore, pretreatment of rapamycin markedly restored
autophagy as shown by the degradation of SQSTM1 in tsc2−/−
 or
pten−/−
 MEFs treated with or without etoposide (Fig. 6D).
To investigate whether the difference in CREB1 response
between WT MEFs and MTOR-hyperactivated MEFs was
due to the distinction in autophagy stimulation upon etoposide
treatment, we examined the effect of pharmacological and
genetic manipulations of autophagy on CREB1 in response
to etoposide. As shown in Figure 7A, treatment of WT MEFs

Figure  4. MTOR positively regulates etoposide-induced FOS expression. (A) MTOR positively regulated etoposide-induced Fos mRNA expression.
Quantitative real-time PCR analysis of Fos mRNA in WT cells, tsc2−/−
 MEFs and rapamycin-pretreated tsc2−/−
 MEFs with or without addition of etoposide
for 24 h. (B) Immunoblotting of FOS expression in WT cells, tsc2−/−
 MEFs and rapamycin-pretreated tsc2−/−
 MEFs with or without addition of etoposide for
24 h. (C) Effect of dominant-negative mutant M1-CREB1 overexpression on phosphorylation of the endogenous CREB1 and FOS expression in tsc2−/−
MEFs. Cells overexpressed with or without M1-CREB1 were subjected to immunoblotting.
©2013 Landes Bioscience. Do not distribute.

2076 Autophagy Volume 9 Issue 12

Figure 5A–E. CREB1 is required for MTOR-mediated enhancement of DNA damage and apoptosis. tsc2−/−
 MEFs (A–C) or ELT3 cells (D–E) transfected
with nontargeting control siRNA or Creb1 specific siRNA were subsequently exposed to etoposide. (A) Reduction of CREB1 decreased the induction of
γ-H2A.X protein and PARP1 cleavage in etoposide-treated tsc2−/−
 MEFs. (B) Reduction in CREB1 increased the viability of etoposide-treated tsc2−/−
 MEFs.
Cell viability was determined with the MTT assay. ***P < 0.001. (C) FACS analysis showed that CREB1 knockdown protects cells against etoposide-induced
apoptosis. The percentage of cells gated in LR and UR quadrants represents the extent of apoptosis. (D) CREB1 knockdown suppressed the induction
of γ-H2A.X protein and PARP1 cleavage of ELT3 cells in response to etoposide. (E) The percentage of apoptotic cells gated in LR and UR quadrants was
decreased after treatment with siRNA against CREB1 in etoposide-treated ELT3 cells.
©2013 Landes Bioscience. Do not distribute.

www.landesbioscience.com Autophagy 2077

with 3-methyladenine (3-MA), a specific inhibitor of autophagy
that inhibits autophagy at an early stage by blocking autophagic
sequestration, resulted in an enhanced response of CREB1 to
etoposide treatment. This inhibitory effect of autophagy on
CREB1 activity upon etoposide treatment was further confirmed
in MEFs genetically deficient in autophagy-related genes,
as indicated by a marked increase in the phosphorylation and
accumulation of CREB1 in atg5−/−
 or atg7−/−
 MEFs treated with
or without etoposide (Fig. 7B). Furthermore, ATG5 knockdown
significantly elevated the phosphorylation and accumulation of
CREB1 in the human lung cancer cell line A549 with or without
etoposide treatment (Fig. 7C).
To further validate the negative role of autophagy in CREB1
activity, we examined the effect of a potent autophagy stimulus,
nutrient deprivation medium, on CREB1 activity. In agreement
with a recent finding,55 the percentage of autophagic cells among
WT MEFs was markedly increased after 4 h nutrient starvation but
steadily decreased to a very low level after 12 h nutrient starvation
(Fig. S4). These dynamic changes inversely correlated with the
expression of SQSTM1 during starvation (Fig. 7D). An impaired
induction of autophagy was observed in MTOR-hyperactivated

MEFs during nutrient starvation, as there was a slight decrease in
SQSTM1 protein level (Fig. 7D) and very few autophagic cells
among tsc2−/−
 MEFs during starvation (Fig. S4). Accordingly, we
observed dynamic fluctuation of CREB1 activity which inversely
correlates with state of starvation-induced autophagy in both
WT MEFs and MTOR-hyperactivated MEFs, as both SQSTM1
and CREB1 were reduced after 4 h nutrient starvation, but
restored by 8 h and thereafter (Fig. 7D; Fig. S5). Nevertheless,
CREB1 activity in MTOR-hyperactivated MEFs was higher
than that in WT MEFs at each time point of starvation (Fig. 7D;
Fig. S5). Furthermore, inhibition of autophagy in WT MEFs with
either 3-MA or knockout of autophagy-related genes reversed the
inhibitory effect of nutrient starvation on CREB1 phosphorylation
(Fig. 7E; Fig. S6), suggesting that autophagy negatively regulates
CREB1 activity. To explore whether this newly identified
mechanism of MTOR regulation of CREB1 through suppression
of autophagy exists in vivo, we examined tissues obtained from
kidney angiomyolipoma driven by hyperactive MTOR due to
TSC2 mutation from a TSC patient. SQSTM1 and phosphorylation
of CREB1 on Ser133 were higher in the kidney tumor tissue
than in paraneoplastic kidney tissue (Fig. 7F). We also examined

Figure 5F–H. CREB1 is required for MTOR-mediated enhancement of DNA damage and apoptosis. WT MEFs were treated with either etoposide, or
forskolin, or etoposide in combination with forskolin (F–H). (F) cAMP stimulation by forskolin enhanced the phosphorylation of CREB1 and promotes
the induction of γ-H2A.X and PARP1 cleavage. (G) cAMP stimulation by forskolin inhibited the viability of cells treated with etoposide. Cell viability
was determined with the MTT assay. ***P < 0.001. (H) Apoptosis was increased after cells were treated with forskolin as depicted by an increase of total
ANXA5-positive cells (LR+UR quadrants).
©2013 Landes Bioscience. Do not distribute.

2078 Autophagy Volume 9 Issue 12

Figure 6. MTOR represses etoposide-induced autophagy. (A) Loss of TSC 2 or PTEN abrogated etoposide-induced LC3 aggregation. Cells were fixed
and stained with anti-LC3 antibody, and the LC3 puncta (green) were visualized with immunofluorescence. DNA was counterstained with DAPI (blue).
Representative images are shown. (B) Quantification of LC3 puncta-positive cells using a threshold of > 10 dots per cell. More than 200 cells were analyzed.
(C) Loss of TSC 2 or PTEN abrogated degradation of SQSTM1 upon 24 h etoposide treatment. (D) Rapamycin induced degradation of SQSTM1 in
tsc2−/−
 or pten−/−
 MEFs. Cells pretreated with 10nM rapamycin or left untreated for 6 h and subsequently exposed to etoposide for 24 h were subjected
to immunoblotting.
©2013 Landes Bioscience. Do not distribute.

www.landesbioscience.com Autophagy 2079

Figure  7. Autophagy suppresses CREB1 activity. Protein samples extracted from cells and tissues were subjected for immunoblotting (A–H).
(A) Inhibition of autophagy boost etoposide-induced CREB1. WT MEFs were treated with either etoposide, 3-MA, or etoposide in combination with
3-MA or left untreated for 24 h. (B) Upon etoposide treatment for 24 h, atg5−/−
 or atg7−/−
 MEFs exhibited enhanced CREB1 signaling. (C) ATG5 knockdown
inhibited autophagy and augments CREB1 phosphorylation and accumulation. A549 cells transfected with nontargeting control siRNA or ATG5 specific
siRNA were subsequently exposed to etoposide for 24 h. (D) Fluctuation of CREB1 activity inversely correlated with state of starvation-induced autophagy.
WT and tsc2−/−
 MEFs were subjected to starvation (starv.) for the indicated times. (E) Inhibition of autophagy reversed starvation suppression
of CREB1. WT MEFs subjected to starvation for the indicated times were treated with or without 3-MA. Deficiency in TSC 2 (F) or PTEN (G) led to inhibition
of autophagy and enhanced phosphorylation of CREB1 protein in vivo. (F) Kidney tumor tissue (T) and adjacent normal kidney tissue (N) from a
TSC patient. (G) Age- and genetic background-matched livers from three WT (AlbCrePten+/+) mice and mutant livers from three AlbCre ptenflox/flox mice.
(H) TSC 2 knockdown inhibited autophagy and elevates the phosphorylation and accumulation of CREB1. A549 cells were transfected with non-targeting
control siRNA or TSC2-specific siRNA for 48 h.
©2013 Landes Bioscience. Do not distribute.

2080 Autophagy Volume 9 Issue 12

the mutant mouse livers with hepatocyte-specific pten deletion.
Increased abundance of SQSTM1 and hyperphosphorylated
CREB1 was seen in the mutant liver tissues, compared with that
in the liver tissues derived from age- and genetic backgroundmatched
WT mice (Fig. 7G). Consistent with those results,
TSC2 knockdown increased the abundance of SQSTM1 and the
phosphorylation of CREB1 in A549 cells (Fig. 7H).
Suppression of autophagy augments etoposide-induced
DNA damage through activation of CREB1
To investigate the effect of autophagy on cell survival and
DNA damage, we first measured the cell viability of WT MEFs
treated with etoposide in the absence or presence of 3-MA. As
observed in Figure 8A, etoposide or 3-MA reduced the cell

viability of WT cells, while the combination of both etoposide
and 3-MA induced a marked decrease in the cell viability of WT
MEFs. As expected, inhibition of autophagy by 3-MA significantly
enhanced etoposide-induced DNA damage in WT MEFs,
as evidenced by increased γ-H2A.X foci and γ-H2A.X expression
(Fig. 8B–D). Furthermore, atg5−/−
 and atg7−/−
 MEFs showed
higher expression of γ-H2A.X comparing to WT MEFs under
etoposide treatment (Fig. 8E). These results suggest that autophagy
protects cells from etoposide-induced DNA damage.
To further investigate the potential role of CREB1 in impaired
autophagy-augmented DNA damage and cell death, siRNAmediated
silencing of Creb1 was performed in atg5−/−
 and atg7−/−
MEFs. As shown in Figure 9A, etoposide-induced cell death of

Figure 8. Pharmacological and genetic inhibition of autophagy augments etoposide-induced DNA damage response. WT MEFs were treated with either
etoposide, 3-MA, etoposide in combination with 3-MA or left untreated (A–D). Autophagy-deficient atg5−/−
 and atg7−/−
 MEFs and their counterpart WT
cells were subjected to etoposide treatment (E). (A) Inhibition of autophagy by 3-MA decreased the viability of etoposide treated cells. Cell viability was
determined with the MTT assay. ***P < 0.001. (B) Inhibition of autophagy by 3-MA enhanced etoposide-induced accumulation of γ-H2A.X foci. Cells
were fixed and stained with anti-γ-H2A.X antibody, and the γ-H2A.X foci (green) were subsequently visualized with immunofluorescence. DNA counterstaining
was performed using DAPI (blue). Representative images are shown. (C) Quantification of the γ-H2A.X foci in more than 200 cells of each treatment
group from (B). (D) Inhibition of autophagy by 3-MA increased etoposide-mediated accumulation of γ-H2A.X protein. (E) Increased accumulation
of γ-H2A.X protein in etoposide-treated atg5−/−
 and atg7−/−
 MEFs.
©2013 Landes Bioscience. Do not distribute.

www.landesbioscience.com Autophagy 2081

atg5−/−
 and atg7−/−
 cells was significantly
inhibited by suppression of
CREB1. In addition, CREB1 knockdown
cells treated with etoposide
exhibited a lower apoptotic rate comparing
to the cells transfected with
negative control siRNA (Fig. 9B).
As expected, knockdown of CREB1
in atg5−/−
 and atg7−/−
 MEFs was able
to block the cleavage of PARP1 and
attenuate the DNA damage response
as assessed by inhibition of γ-H2A.X
induction upon etoposide treatment
(Fig. 9C).
Reactivation of CREB1 or
inhibition of autophagy alleviates
MTOR inhibition-mediated
chemoresistance
To elucidate the role of autophagy
regulation of CREB1 activity in
MTOR inhibition-mediated protective
effect on cell survival, we examined
the effect of forskolin or 3-MA
alone or in combination with etoposide
on the cell viability of rapamycinpretreated
MTOR-hyperactivated
cells. Preinhibition of MTOR markedly
increased the cell viability of MTOR-hyperactivated cells
treated with etoposide (Fig. 2A; Fig. 10A). However, forskolin
or 3-MA in combination with etoposide greatly reduced the cell
viability of MTOR-hyperactivated cells treated with rapamycin,
indicating that reactivation of CREB1 or suppression of autophagy
can reverse MTOR inhibition-mediated chemoresistance.
Furthermore, we found that forskolin or 3-MA alone significantly
reduced the cell viability of MTOR-hyperactivated cells pretreated
with rapamycin, suggesting that reactivation of CREB1 or
suppression of autophagy can enhance the efficacy of rapamycin.
This result suggests that autophagy suppression of CREB1 activity
is responsible for MTOR inhibition-mediated chemoresistance.

Figure  9. Autophagy promotes DNA
damage-induced apoptosis through
CREB1. atg5−/−
 or atg7−/−
 MEFs transfected
with nontargeting control siRNA
or Creb1-specific siRNA were subsequently
exposed to etoposide (A–C).
(A) Reduction in CREB1 increased the
viability of etoposide-treated atg5−/−
 or
atg7−/−
MEFs. Cell viability was determined
with the MTT assay. ***P < 0.001. (B) FACS
analysis showed that CREB1 knockdown
protected cells from etoposide-induced
apoptosis. The percentage of cells gated
in LR and UR quadrants represents the
extent of apoptosis. (C) Immunoblotting
assay showed that knockdown of CREB1
attenuated the induction of γ-H2A.X
protein and PARP1 cleavage in etoposide-treated
atg5−/−
 or atg7−/−
 MEFs.

Discussion

Tumor chemoresistance is an important contributor to the
failure of cancer therapy. By inhibiting MTOR signaling pathway,
rapamycin is emerging as an effective anticancer drug.
However, recent data, including ours presented here, have implicated
MTOR inhibition in chemoresistance, as rapamycin renders
cells refractory to chemotherapy. In this study, we have
identified that MTOR activates CREB1 through suppression of
autophagy. CREB1 activation due to impaired autophagy sensitizes
MTOR-hyperactivated cells to etoposide-induced genomic
damage and subsequent apoptosis. Suppression of CREB1 by
©2013 Landes Bioscience. Do not distribute.

2082 Autophagy Volume 9 Issue 12

activated autophagy attenuates etoposide-induced DNA damage
and underlies rapamycin-mediated chemoresistance (Fig. 10B).
Inhibition of autophagy or potentiation of CREB1 may therefore
become a novel regimen in synergizing the effect of chemotherapy
in the treatment of cancer.
By integrating a wide range of signals, including nutrients,
growth factors, and stress conditions, MTOR regulates a variety
of cellular processes. Under DNA damage-induced stress conditions,
MTOR activity can be regulated through an AMPK-TSC2
dependent mechanism.56 However the effectors downstream of
MTOR and their roles in DNA damage-induced stress response
remain largely elusive. In the present study, we show that MTOR
suppressor TSC2- or PTEN-deficient MEFs exhibited enhanced
CREB1 activation under either etoposide or cisplatin induced
genotoxic stress condition. Furthermore, suppression of MTOR
by either rapamycin or siRNA silencing inhibited the response of
CREB1 and its target gene FOS to genotoxic stress in TSC2- or
PTEN-deficient MEFs and tumor cell lines. The CREB1 activation
is thus dependent on MTOR signaling.

CREB1 functions as a nuclear transcription factor and is
regulated by multiple protein kinases and protein phosphatases.
Recently, it has been shown that CREB1 can be degraded
through the proteasome pathway.57,58 Besides the ubiquitination-dependent
proteasomal degradation system, autophagy is
another major intracellular protein degradation system that is
important for the turnover of cytoplasmic proteins and organelles.59,60
We found that the autophagy induction is impaired
in MTOR-hyperactivated MEFs and CREB1 activity is negatively
regulated by autophagy. Both the pharmacological and
genetic suppressions of autophagy were able to stimulate the
phosphorylation and accumulation of CREB1 under the conditions
of two autophagy stimuli, chemotherapy and nutrient
starvation, respectively. Therefore the status of autophagy dictates
the magnitude of CREB1 activation by chemotherapeutics.
Furthermore, an inverse correlation between autophagy activity
and CREB1 activity in vivo was presented in the kidney tumor
tissue obtained from a TSC patient and the liver tissues derived
from the mice with hepatocyte-specific pten deletion. Although

Figure  10. Reactivation of CREB1 alleviates MTOR inhibition-mediated chemoresistance. (A) Reactivation of CREB1 by forskolin or inhibition of
autophagy by 3-MA reduced the viability of 10 nM rapamycin pretreated-MTOR-hyperactivated cells with or without etoposide treatment. Cell viability
was determined with the MTT assay. Data are shown as the mean ± s.d. of three replicates and are representative of three independent experiments.
Comparison of column 9 and 11 with column 7, column 10 and 12 with column 8, and column 8 with column 2 (*P < 0.05; ***, ### or ppp represent
P < 0.001). (B) Diagraphic illustration for regulation of CREB1 by MTOR-related autophagy signaling in modulating stress-induced DNA damage in WT,
tsc2−/−
, or tsc2−/−
 MEFs treated with rapamycin. The dark triangles represent DSBs. The thickness of the lines represents the intensity of the effects.
©2013 Landes Bioscience. Do not distribute.

www.landesbioscience.com Autophagy 2083

we have uncovered autophagy suppression of CREB1, its underlying
regulatory mechanism is yet to be elucidated.
CREB1 is a critical cell signaling node regulating cell proliferation,
apoptosis, and other cellular responses. In this study,
we found that suppression of CREB1 inhibited etoposideinduced
apoptosis and increased the cell viability in MTORhyperactivated
cells. On the other hand, stimulation of cAMP
and CREB1 signaling enhanced DNA damage-induced apoptosis
and inhibited the cell viability in WT MEFs. Furthermore, reactivation
of cAMP and CREB1 signaling significantly suppressed
the viability of rapamycin-pretreated MTOR-hyperactivated
MEFs. These results suggest that aberrant MTOR hyperactivation
sensitizes cells to DNA damage-induced apoptotic cell death
through sustained CREB1 activation.
Although the elevation of autophagy activity has been
observed in cancer cells treated with chemotherapy, the role of
autophagy activation in chemotherapy causes considerable controversy.
Here, we present that the induced autophagy represents
a protective role in WT MEFs as inhibition of autophagy
enhanced etoposide-induced DNA damage and reduced the cell
viability. Consistent with the observation from Henske’s group,61
inhibition of autophagy significantly suppressed the viability of
rapamycin-pretreated MTOR-hyperactivated MEFs.
Even though it is known that defective autophagy leads to
increased genomic damage, the mechanism underlying this connection
is not yet identified. Accumulation of malfunctioning
intracellular structures and noxious protein aggregates due to
autophagy impairment may contribute to induction of genome
damage.62 Our data demonstrate that impaired autophagy due to
genetic depletion of autophagy-related genes promoted etoposideinduced
DNA damage response through accumulation of activated
CREB1, as suppression of CREB1 reduced DNA damage, inhibited
apoptosis, and increased cell survival. It remains to be determined
how CREB1 mediates etoposide-induced DNA damage and apoptotic
cell death. MTOR is a positive regulator of CCND1 expression.63-65
CCND1, a well-known target gene of CREB1,45 functions
in amplifying the cellular DNA damage.66 Therefore we speculate
that MTOR suppresses autophagy which in turn unleashes its
inhibitory effect on CREB1 function. The potentiated CREB1
then stimulates CCND1 expression and increases DNA damage.
In conclusion, our results not only reveal an important role for
MTOR modulation of autophagy signaling in regulating CREB1
activity, but also elucidate the role of the hyperactive CREB1
induced by an autophagy inhibition in the regulation of cell
viability and etoposide-induced DNA damage response. CREB1
inducers as well as autophagy inhibitors thus can be seen as potential
enhancers of chemotherapeutics in cancer treatment. Further
elucidation of how autophagy signaling regulates CREB1 activity
may lead to the identification of novel targets for the treatment of
cancers driven by aberrant activation of MTOR signaling.

Materials and Methods

Reagents, antibodies, and plasmids
Rapamycin (R0395), etoposide (E1383), 3-MA (08592),
forskolin (F6886), bafilomycin A1
 (B1793), saponin (S4521),

3-[4, 5-dimethyl-thiazol-2yl] 2, 5-diphenyltetrazoliumbromide
(MTT) (88417), and 4´, 6´-diamidino-2-phenylindole (DAPI)
(D9542) were purchased from Sigma-Aldrich. Cisplatin was
from DBL, Hospira. Lipofectamine 2000 (11668-019) was
obtained from Invitrogen. DMEM (SH30022.01B) and FBS
(SV30087.02) were from HyClone. Dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO)
(0231) was from Amresco. Chemiluminescence (NC15079) was
from Thermo Scientific. Antibodies were from Cell Signaling
[anti-PARP1 (9542), anti-PTEN (9559), anti-γ-H2A.X (2577),
anti-phospho-CREB1 (Ser133) (9198), anti-CREB1 (9197), and
anti-ATG7 (8558)], Novus Biologicals [anti-ATG5 (NB110-
53818)], MBL [anti-SQSTM1 (PM045) and anti-LC3 (PM036)],
and Santa Cruz Biotechnology [anti-FOS/c-FOS (sc-52), antiTSC2
(sc-893), anti-ACTB/β-ACTIN (sc-8432), anti-TUBULIN
(sc-12462), FITC-conjugated goat anti-rabbit (sc-2012),
HRP-labeled goat anti-mouse (sc-2005), and HRP-labeled goat
anti-rabbit (sc2004)]. Anti-phospho-RPS6/S6 (Ser235/236) has
been described previously.67 Gal4CREB (M1-CREB1) plasmid
was a generous gift from Michael Greenberg (Harvard Medical
School). pLXIN-hyg-M1-CREB1 was generated by the insertion
of a XhoI and BglII digested PCR product of Gal4CREB
plasmid using primers 5´-CTCGGATCCA CCATGACCAT
GGAATCTGGA-3´ and 5´-GCGCTCGAGA TCTGATTTGT
GGCAGTAAA-3´ into a modified pLXIN retroviral vector with
a hygromycin resistance gene (pLXIN-hyg).68
Cell culture
Immortalized tsc2−/−
, pten−/−
 MEFs and control MEF lines
as well as TSC2-deficient rat ELT-3 cells have been described
previously.8,67,69,70 Immortalized atg5−/−
 MEFs were generated by
Noboru Mizushima (Tokyo Medical and Dental University) and
immortalized atg7−/−
 MEFs were generated by Masaaki Komatsu
(Tokyo Metropolitan Institute Medical Science). Human A549,
MCF7, and MDA-MB-468 cell lines were from American Type
Culture Collection. ELT-3 cells were maintained and propagated
in Dulbecco’s modified Eagle’s medium (DMEM)/F12 (1:1)
with 10% fetal bovine serum. The other cell lines used in this
study were maintained in DMEM medium supplemented with
10% FBS and 1% antibiotics in a 37 °C humidified incubator
containing 5% CO2
. Production of retroviruses and subsequent
generation of stable gene expression cell lines were described
elsewhere.2
RNA interference
The siRNAs and their controls were synthesized by Shanghai
GenePharma. Cells were seeded in 6-well plates and transfected
with siRNAs using Lipofectamine 2000 for 48 h following the
manufacturer’s instructions. siRNA targeted sequences were as
follows: negative control: 5´-TTCTCCGAAC GTGTCACGT-3´;
mouse and rat Creb1: 5´- GGAGTCTGTG GATAGTGTA - 3´;71
mouse Mtor: 5´-GAACTCGCTG ATCCAGATG-3´; human
ATG5: 5´- GGACGAATTC CAACTTGTT -3´; human TSC2:
5´-CAATGAGTCA CAGTCCTTTGA -3´.72
Cell viability assay
MEFs were plated at 3,000 cells per well in a 96-well tissue
culture plate. The next day, cells were treated with 0.4 μM etoposide
alone, or in combination with 5 mM 3-MA or 50 μM
forskolin as described for the indicated time. After a 2-d culture
©2013 Landes Bioscience. Do not distribute.

2084 Autophagy Volume 9 Issue 12

period, an MTT solution was added to a final concentration of
0.5 mg/ml. After 4 h, the colored formazan crystals were dissolved
in 150 μl of DMSO, and optical densities were read
using a microplate reader at 490 nm. The absorbance at 490 nm
directly corresponds with cell number. The viability ratio was
defined as OD value of the sample/OD value of control × 100%.
Each data point is the average of results from 5 wells from each of
three independent experiments.
Flow cytometry analysis
After treatment of cells with 0.4 μM etoposide for 24 h, cells
were analyzed for apoptosis using an ANXA5-FITC and PI apoptosis
assay kit (Neobioscience, FAK011) according to the manufacturer’s
protocol. Briefly, 1 × 106
 cells were collected, washed twice
with PBS, and incubated with ANXA5-FITC and PI for 15 min at
room temperature in the dark. Cells were then immediately analyzed
with the BD Accuri C6 flow cytometer (BD Biosciences).
The combination of ANXA5-FITC and PI allows for the differentiation
among viable (ANXA5-FITC negative, PI negative), early
apoptotic (ANXA5-FITC positive, PI negative), late apoptotic
and necrotic (ANXA5-FITC positive, PI positive) cells.
Quantitative real-time RT-PCR analysis
Total RNA was extracted from cells using Trizol reagent
(Invitrogen, 15596-018) and reversely transcribed using the
PrimeScript RT Reagent Kit (TaKaRa, DRR037A). cDNA was
used as a template in a quantitative PCR reaction. Amplification
was done for 40 cycles using TransStart Green qPCR SuperMix
(TransGen Biotech, AQ131-03). Oligonucleotide primers were
synthesized to detect Fos with Actb as internal control. Primers
were synthesized by Sangon Biological Engineering Technology
& Services. The primer sequences were as follows: mouse Fos
forward: 5´-ATGGGCTCTC CTGTCAACAC-3´, mouse Fos
reverse: 5´-ACGGAGGAGA CCAGAGTGG-3´; mouse Actb
forward: 5´-AGAGGGAAAT CGTGCGTGAC-3´, mouse Actb
reverse: 5´-CAATAGTGAT GACCTGGCCGT-3´.
Autophagy analysis
For autophagy stimulation, cells were washed 3 times with
PBS and incubated for indicated times in starvation medium
(DMEM medium without serum and glutamine) (Invitrogen,
11960) or complete medium containing 0.4 μM etoposide in a
37 °C humidified incubator containing 5% CO2
. Autophagy was
assessed by endogenous LC3 redistribution, LC3 conversion from
LC3-I to LC3-II and SQSTM1 degradation. To inhibit starvation-
or chemotherapeutics-induced autophagy, cells were treated
with 5 mM 3-MA in starvation medium or complete medium, or
with bafilomycin A1
 (100 ng/ml) in complete medium.
Immunofluorescence assay
Cells were cultured on glass coverslips prior to immunofluorescence
analysis. After treatment of cells with indicated drugs for
24 h, cells were washed 3 times with PBS, fixed in 4% paraformaldehyde
for 10 min and permeabilized in PBS containing 0.1%
saponin for 10 min. After being washed with PBS and blocked
with normal goat serum for 30 min, the cells were stained with
primary antibodies (anti-γ-H2A.X for endogenous γ-H2A.X;
anti-LC3 for endogenous LC3) in blocking buffer for 1 h, followed
by washes 3 times with PBS and incubated with FITC-conjugated
goat anti-rabbit secondary antibody in blocking buffer for 1 h.

Nuclear counterstaining with DAPI was performed after removal
of excess secondary antibody. All procedures were conducted at
room temperature. Confocal laser scanning of fixed cells was performed
on a confocal microscope (Ultraview vox.; PerkinELmer)
equipped with a camera (Hamamatsu, C9100-13) using an
Olympus APON 60× 1.49 NA objective. FITC and DAPI images
were taken and overlapped using volocity software (PerkinElmer).
Immunoblotting
For immunoblotting, cells were washed 3 times with PBS and
harvested on ice with lysis buffer (2% SDS, 0.1 M DTT, 60 mM
Tris pH 6.8, 10% glycerol). Whole cell lysates were resolved by
SDS-PAGE. Proteins were subsequently transferred onto PVDF
membrane (Millipore, IPVH00010) and blocked for 1 h at room
temperature in PBS containing 0.2% Tween-20 (PBST) and 5%
nonfat dry milk and immunoblotted with the indicated antibodies
in PBST with 5% nonfat dry milk, followed by the incubation
with HRP-labeled secondary antibodies and the detection
by chemiluminescence.
Human kidney tumor assessment
Kidney angiomyolipomas and its adjacent normal kidney tissue
from a TSC patient with a TSC2 mutation (g.10059delC,
p.S132SfsX50) were freshly dissected, sonicated, and extracted
with lysis buffer for immunoblotting.70 All the procedures were
performed under the permission of the Peking Union Medical
College Hospital Ethics Board.
Assessment of mouse livers with hepatocyte pten deletion
To generate mice with hepatocyte-specific pten deletion, we
crossed Ptenflox/flox mice with AlbCre transgenic mice.73 For immunoblotting,
the liver tissues from 3 WT-mice (AlbCrePten+/+,
9 mo-old) and the liver tissues from 3 homozygous Pten exons
4 and 5 deletion mice (AlbCre ptenflox/flox, 9 mo-old) were sonicated
and extracted with lysis buffer. All animal experiments
were approved by the Animal Research Committee, Institute of
Laboratory Animals, and Chinese Academy of Medical Sciences
& Peking Union Medical College.
Statistical analysis
For immunofluorescence assay, all values are reported as mean
± s.d. from 3 independent experiments. For the MTT assay, data
are shown as the mean ± s.d. of 5 replicates and are representative
of 3 independent experiments. Differences were analyzed with
the 2-tailed Student t-test with GraphPad Prism 5 software and
P < 0.05 considered statistically significant.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest

No potential conflicts of interest needed to be disclosed.

