Potential Clinical Uses of CDK
Inhibitors: Lessons from Synthetic
Lethality Screens

Ladislava Vymetalov ˇ a and Vladim ´ ´ır Krystof ˇ

Laboratory of Growth Regulators, Centre of the Region Hana for Biotechnological and Agricultural Research, ´
Palacky University and Institute of Experimental Botany AS CR, ´ Slechtitel ˇ u 11, CZ-78371 Olomouc, Czech ˚
Republic

Published online 25 June 2015 in Wiley Online Library (wileyonlinelibrary.com).
DOI 10.1002/med.21354
Abstract:
Developments in genetic and genomic technology have produced vast quantities of data that
are gradually yielding new insights into fundamental cellular and molecular processes. In particular, they
have revealed some differences between normal and transformed cells that could potentially be exploited to
develop targeted, personalized cancer therapies with unprecedented efficiencies. This review summarizes
recent findings from synthetic lethality (SL) screens against cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) that can
be targeted with small molecule kinase inhibitors. SL screens can be used to identify cancers sensitive
to CDK inhibitors. Several SL partners of specific CDKs have been identified, including MYC, K-Ras,
VHL, PI3K, and PARP, all of which are discussed in the review. CDK inhibitors have been in clinical
trials for nearly 20 years and it has become clear that effective therapy using these compounds will require
careful selection of patients with respect to the specific molecular phenotype of their disease. C
2015
Wiley Periodicals, Inc. Med. Res. Rev., 35, No. 6, 1156–1174, 2015

Key words: cyclin-dependent kinase; inhibitor; cancer; drug; synthetic lethality

1. SYNTHETIC LETHALITY AND THE EVOLUTION OF TARGETED THERAPY

Anticancer chemotherapeutics developed over the past century have saved many lives. However,
there are still some bottlenecks that hinder their use in vivo. One of the main problems is their
low therapeutic index, that is, the narrow concentration range within which they kill cancers
without harming healthy tissues.1 Most clinically used anticancer drugs kill rapidly growing
cells nonspecifically, with the result that they target not only cancer cells but also certain
healthy dividing cells such as hematopoietic bone marrow progenitor cells, hair follicle cells, and
gastrointestinal mucosal epithelial cells.2 Many normal nondividing cells are also sensitive to

Contract grant sponsor: Ministry of Education, Youth and Sports of the Czech Republic; Contract grant number:
LO1204. Czech Science Foundation; Contract grant number: 15-15264S.
Correspondence to: Vladim´ır Krystof, Laboratory of Growth Regulators, Palack ˇ y University, ´ Slechtitel ˇ u 27, 78371, ˚
Olomouc, Czech Republic, E-mail: vladimir.krystof@upol.cz

Medicinal Research Reviews, 35, No. 6, 1156–1174, 2015
C
2015 Wiley Periodicals, Inc.
POTENTIAL CLINICAL USES OF CDK INHIBITORS
1157

classical chemotherapeutics.3–5 Consequently, there is an urgent need for a better understanding
of the differences between normal and cancer cells. Such an understanding would enable the
identification of targets that are only essential for the viability of tumor cells, leading to the
development of new drugs targeting cancers as specifically as possible.
Tumorigenesis is a complex multistep process that often takes many years, during which
cells acquire a set of genetic lesions that ultimately yield a cancerous state. It has been stated that
cancers are often self-sufficient in the production of growth factors, less sensitive to growthinhibitory
signals and induction of apoptosis, unlimited in their replicative potential, and
capable of inducing both angiogenesis and metastases.6 These properties are typically conferred
by loss of function mutations in tumor suppressor genes and gain of function mutations in
oncogenes that are collectively critically important for cancer development. While they are
essential for the induction of the cancerous state, these attributes can also be regarded as
weaknesses that could be exploited therapeutically because they define the ways in which
transformed cells differ from their normal counterparts.
A pivotal milestone in the development of molecular anticancer therapeutics was the discovery
of imatinib mesylate, a potent kinase inhibitor targeting a protein encoded by a fused
breakpoint cluster region (BCR)-Abelson murine leukemia viral oncogene homologue (ABL).
This oncogene is activated by a translocation between chromosomes 9 and 22 in hematopoietic
stem cells, and induces chronic myeloid leukemia (CML).7 Imatinib proved to be strikingly effective
in the treatment of CML patients and was approved for this purpose in 2001. Since then,
several small molecule and monoclonal antibody inhibitors of oncogenic enzymes have been
approved for therapeutic use, and many others are in various stages of clinical development.8, 9
While most of these agents have acceptable therapeutic indices, it is well known that they target
both oncoproteins present in cancer cells and other proteins found in normal cells. Although
several of the newer agents exhibit improved selectivity toward cancers, many fail in cancer
treatment due to the emergence of distinct patterns of resistance based on general multidrug
resistance, metabolism, compartmentalization or target-specific mutations such as point mutations,
and mutations that induce oncogene overexpression. It therefore seems necessary to
identify new strategies in order to overcome issues of drug resistance and find ways of targeting
cells with loss of function mutations.
Over the past few years, intensive studies on cancer genetics have yielded new insights
into gene–gene interactions. As a result, conventional strategies that target oncogenic pathways
regardless of their impact on normal cell signaling have been outperformed by new alternatives
discovered as a result of the ongoing development of genomic technologies. A very promising
anticancer drug discovery method that was first described in 1922 is the so-called synthetic lethal
(SL) approach.2 SL is a genetic property whereby the presence of one gene allows an organism
to tolerate genetic changes in a second gene that would be lethal in the absence of the first
(Fig. 1A).10 In some cases, simultaneous mutations in both genes may only reduce cellular
fitness, resulting in a condition known as synthetic sickness. Strategies based on synthetic
sickness and lethality could potentially solve a major problem of anticancer drug development
by permitting the specific targeting of cancer cells with loss of function mutations in tumor
suppressor genes. The products of a pair of synthetic lethal genes may be components of the
same multiprotein complex, participate in parallel redundant pathways, belong to the same
linear pathway, or even act in two separate pathways essential for cell viability.
Many synthetic lethal interactions have been mapped out in a range of model organisms
using RNA interference. However, the field as a whole is rooted in studies on the budding
yeast Saccharomyces cerevisiae. In 1999, a yeast knockout library was generated in which each
open reading frame was replaced with a genetic marker and tagged with two specific molecular
TAGs or barcodes (upstream and downstream)—20-base oligomer sequences that serve as

Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med

 10981128, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/med.21354 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [01/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1158
VYMETALOV ˇ A AND KRY ´ STOF ˇ

Figure 1. (A) Synthetic lethality is a genetic property whereby the presence of gene A allows a cell to tolerate
mutation in gene B that would otherwise be lethal (and vice versa). (B) In an alternative version of synthetic
lethality, gene A may interact with the third gene C such that increasing the expression or activity of C would
be synthetically lethal when paired with the downregulation of gene A. (C) Schematic depiction of known SL
interactions involving CDKs. Arrows pointing downward and upward indicate decreased and increased gene
activity, respectively.

strain identifiers.11 Synthetic lethal or sick interactions were then identified by crossing strains
carrying mutations of interest with the array of deletion mutants after mating and sporulation.
The desired interactions were readily identified because they produce haploid double mutants.
However, another technique was required to quantify the double mutations effects on growth
rates. To this end, the molecular barcodes in each mutant strain were flanked by universal
priming sites, enabling the amplification of the tag sequences by PCR. The amplified products
were hybridized to oligonucleotide arrays so that the intensity of the amplified signal could be
determined.12 However, many cancer-related genes do not have yeast orthologs, so it was also
necessary to conduct similar studies using alternative metazoan models. The most widely used
organisms for this purpose were Caenorhabditis elegans and Drosophila melanogaster, both of
which enabled the use of more sophisticated RNA interference strategies than were previously
possible. Unfortunately, the siRNA sequences used to induce interference in simpler model
organisms elicit antiviral responses in mammalian cells, so they were replaced with shRNA
encoded by plasmids or viral vectors.13, 14 This improved RNAi system has become a staple of
novel screening strategies that enable the systematic identification of gene–gene interactions in
human cells. There are two main approaches used by geneticists to map out SL relationships,
referred to as the forward and reverse approaches. The forward tactic relies on the genetic
variability of cancer cell lines characterized by a common mutation in a gene of interest, while
the reverse strategy uses an isogenic cell line pair created by a single specific genetic change.
These approaches led to the identification of several new synthetic lethal interactions. For
example, many cancers are characterized by oncogenic mutations in Ras, which is difficult to
inhibit directly with small molecule inhibitors and was therefore targeted for synthetic lethal
screening. It was demonstrated that cells expressing mutant K-Ras are highly dependent on
the expression of TANK-binding kinase 1 (TBK1), mitotic polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1), and the

Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med

 10981128, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/med.21354 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [01/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
POTENTIAL CLINICAL USES OF CDK INHIBITORS
1159

transcriptional repressor SNAIL2.15–17 In a similar way it was shown that deficiencies of the
tumor suppressor Rb, which are often responsible for malignant conversion, can be overcome by
inactivating tuberous sclerosis complex 2 (TSC2); that overexpression of the serine/threonineprotein
kinase PIM1 in prostate cancer cells can be overcome by PLK1 inhibition; and that p53
deprivation can be relieved by silencing telomerase reverse transcriptase (TERT).18–20
While novel screening strategies have revealed many new SL interactions, the limited overlap
between the results obtained in different SL screening campaigns targeting the same gene
indicates that there are important weaknesses in existing methodologies. The identification of
three different SL partner proteins in three separate K-Ras screens is a case in point, and suggests
that the genetic backgrounds of the tested cells can have significant effects on the observed
lethality. The limited overlap between the results of different SL screens targeting the same
protein may be due to the use of different cell lines in different studies, imperfections in RNAimediated
gene knockdown, or off-target effects. Regardless of its causes, this variability makes
it essential to thoroughly validate newly identified SL interactions using multiple independent
models in order to provide a sound basis for rational patient–drug pair selection.
Except of experimental studies, many predictive approaches have been proposed, but these
primarily focus on extending experimentally derived SL networks rather than de novo prediction
of interactions, limiting their utility for cancer.21 However, a new computational algorithm
DAISY (data mining synthetic lethality identification pipeline) that aims to facilitate the largescale
identification of SLs in cancer has been described recently.22 Importantly, cancer SL
networks identified by DAISY included known SL partners of tumor suppressors and oncogenes.
In addition, it has been shown to be useful in predicting gene essentiality, drug efficacy,
and clinical prognosis.
It is not yet clear whether discovered SL interactions will ever translate into efficient
therapeutics. However, the basic concept of genetic screens for SL interactions has already
been applied in drug discovery screening studies. In these investigations, an inhibitor of a given
protein is screened against a panel of viable cells bearing mutations in different genes to identify
cases where the combination of the mutation and inhibitor results in cell death but neither is
fatal by itself.23 This approach has revealed SL effects of many compounds in specific cancer
cell lines. At present, the most important clinical application of an SL relationship is probably
the use of synthetic poly(ADP-ribose) polymerase-1 (PARP-1) inhibitors such as olaparib or
iniparib to treat breast cancers featuring deletions of BRCA-1 or BRCA-2.24 BRCA-1 and 2 are
necessary for the repair of DNA double-strand breaks (DSB) by homologous recombination
(HR). PARP-1 is implicated in the repair of single-strand breaks (SSB) via autopoly(ADPribosyl)ation,
in which it serves as a docking site for other proteins involved in the repair
process. PARP-1 inhibition prevents the docking of these proteins, leading to the formation
of multiple SSB; these SSB in turn give rise to DSB at replication forks. The DSBs would
normally be repaired by HR, but this is not possible in the absence of BRCA-1 or BRCA-2
so the DNA lesions are instead repaired by nonhomologous end joining (NHEJ), leading to
extensive chromosomal alterations and cell death.
The identification of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs) as cell cycle regulators prompted the
development of several small molecule CDK inhibitors, many of which have shown promising
results in the context of anticancer therapy and could be potentially exploitable in combinatorial
experiments as discussed in the next section.

2. DEREGULATION OF CDKS IS A FREQUENT HALLMARK OF CANCER DISEASES

The CDKs are a family of 20 serine/threonine protein kinases that are generally classified as
regulators of the cell cycle (CDK1, 2, 4, 6) or transcription (CDK7, 8, 9, 11, 20). However, in the

Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med

 10981128, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/med.21354 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [01/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1160
VYMETALOV ˇ A AND KRY ´ STOF ˇ

last few years they have been shown to have diverse functions including the regulation of angiogenesis,
senescence, exocytosis, spermatogenesis, and neuronal development.25 CDK activity is
highly dependent on the binding of regulatory subunits called cyclins, whose name derives from
their oscillatory expression: they are produced and degraded during different phases of the cell
cycle. To be fully activated, most CDKs must be phosphorylated by CDK7 at specific residues
in their so-called T-loops.26 The timing of CDK activity is also subject to negative regulation
mediated by the binding of natural CDK inhibitors (INK4, Cip/Kip), and by inhibitory
phosphorylation catalyzed by the Wee1 and Myt1 kinases.26, 27 These phosphorylations can be
reversed by the cdc25 phosphatases.
The uncontrolled upregulation of CDK activity has been identified as a hallmark of cancer
and several CDK hyperactivity-inducing mechanisms have been identified. Many of these mechanisms
involve loss of function mutations (deletions, silencing, or point mutations) affecting
genes encoding natural CDK inhibitors or the overexpression of CDK-activating cyclins. For
example, excessive production of cyclin D1 has been detected in breast, bladder, esophageal, and
squamous cell carcinoma.28 Similarly, overproduction of cyclin E has been detected in colon,
lung, and breast cancers as well as acute lymphoblastic and myeloid leukemias,29–33 and cyclin A
overproduction has been observed in lung carcinoma.30 In addition, some breast malignancies
are promoted by shortened hyperactive forms of cyclin E that are generated by proteolysis.34
However, in some cases, especially those involving CDK4 and 6, hyperactivity is caused by the
amplification or overexpression of the CDK gene itself.35–37 Alternatively, mutations in CDK
genes may affect the corresponding proteins’ sensitivity to negative regulators. For example,
in melanoma the R24C point mutation in CDK4 was found to cause insensitivity to inhibition
by p16INK4a without affecting the variant protein’s ability to bind cyclin D and form
an active kinase.38 Finally, CDK activation requires the removal of inhibitory phosphates by
Cdc25 phosphatases, which are present at unusually high levels in certain tumors.39, 40 For these
reasons, CDKs and their natural modulators have become important targets for anticancer
drug development in recent years. Most efforts in this area have focused on small molecule
inhibitors.
Over the past 20 years, many CDK inhibitors have been developed using different approaches,
and around 24 have entered clinical trials (Table I, Fig. 2).41–43 Most CDK inhibitors
are pan-selective and block the transcriptional regulators CDK7 and CDK9 in addition to
the cell cycle regulating CDKs. It was demonstrated that these compounds induce cell cycle
arrest and activate apoptosis by inhibiting transcription, which is most effective in cells that
are strongly dependent on the expression of antiapoptotic proteins with short half-lives such
as myeloid cell leukemia 1 (Mcl-1). Many groups have demonstrated that early inhibitors such
as roscovitine and flavopiridol are effective against multiple myeloma and other malignancies
that depend on continuous mRNA synthesis and Mcl-1 expression.44–46 Inhibitors of the
transcriptional CDKs also influence the stabilization of the tumor suppressor p53, probably
by downregulating its target genes; these include the ubiquitin ligase Mdm2, which negatively
regulates p53.47–49 On the basis of various in vitro studies, it has been suggested that the simultaneous
inhibition of multiple CDKs (i.e., CDK1, 2, and 9) could be a desirable feature of clinical
drug candidates.50 The justification for targeting multiple CDKs at once comes from studies
on genetic models;51 cells lacking one or more interphase CDKs can proliferate because most
CDKs are redundant and capable of standing in for one another if one is disabled somehow.
The only CDK whose functions cannot be fulfilled by some other member of the CDK family
is CDK1.51, 52
Although the simultaneous inhibition of several CDKs may be more efficient than selectively
blocking a single CDK in many cases, there has been considerable interest in developing
inhibitors specific to individual CDK isoforms over the last few years.42, 53 It was recently shown
that many cancers are heavily dependent on the activity of a single CDK—breast cancer on

Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med

 10981128, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/med.21354 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [01/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
POTENTIAL CLINICAL USES OF CDK INHIBITORS
1161

Table I. Some Small Molecular CDK Inhibitors in Clinical Trials
Compound (alternative name) Target Trial phase Condition References
AT7519 CDK1, CDK2, CDK4, CDK6, CDK9 I/II Lymphoma, mantle cell
lymphoma, chronic
lymphocytic leukemia,
multiple myeloma

90

BAY 1000394 (roniciclib) CDK1, CDK2, CDK3, CDK4, CDK7, CDK9 I/II Neoplasms, small cell lung
carcinoma

91

Flavopiridol (alvocidib, HMR 1275,
L86-8275)

CDK1, CDK2, CDK4, CDK6, CDK7, CDK9 I/II Hematologic malignancies 92,93

LEE011 (ribociclib) CDK4, CDK6 I/II Solid tumors, lymphomas,
malignant rhabdoid tumors,
neuroblastoma, melanoma,
breast cancer

www.cancer.gov

LY2835219 (abemaciclib) CDK4, CDK6 I/II Advanced cancer, mantle cell
lymphoma, lymphoma,
breast neoplasms, nonsmall
cell lung cancer

www.cancer.gov

P1446A-05 CDK4 I Solid tumors, hematologic
malignancy

www.cancer.gov

P276-00 (riviciclib) CDK1, CDK4, CDK9 I/II Multiple myeloma, mantle cell
lymphoma

94

PD-0332991 (palbociclib) CDK4, CDK6 I/II/III Solid tumors, hematologic
malignancies

95

PHA-848125 (milciclib) CDK2, CDK4, CDK7 I/II Thymic carcinoma, solid
tumors

96

Roscovitine (seliciclib, CYC202) CDK1, CDK2, CDK5, CDK7, CDK9 I/II Breast cancer, advanced solid
tumors, nonsmall cell lung
carcinoma

97,98

SCH-727965 (dinaciclib) CDK1, CDK2, CDK5, CDK9 I/II/III Hematologic malignancies,
solid tumors

99

SNS-032 (BMS-387032) CDK2, CDK7, CDK9 I Hematologic malignancies,
tumors

100

R-547 CDK1, CDK2, CDK4 I Neoplasms 101
TG02 (SB1317) CDK1, CDK2, CDK7, CDK9 I Hematologic malignancies 102

Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med

 10981128, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/med.21354 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [01/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1162
VYMETALOV ˇ A AND KRY ´ STOF ˇ

Figure 2. Chemical structures of some CDK inhibitors in clinical development.

CDK4, pancreatic cancer on CDK5, and bladder cancer on CDK6, for instance.54–56 Several
specific inhibitors have been designed, often with the assistance of molecular modeling. These
agents include BS-181 and EXEL-8647, which target CDK7 and CDK9, respectively,57, 58 as well
as three compounds targeting CDK4/6 that are currently undergoing clinical trials: LEE011,
LY2835219, and palbociclib (granted accelerated approval by FDA in 2015).59–61
While there are currently many CDK inhibitors in clinical trials, several problems with their
therapeutic use remain to be addressed. In particular, it is not straightforward to determine
which patients are likely to be most sensitive to specific therapies and many current compounds
have low therapeutic indices while exhibiting strong general cytotoxicity. These problems could
potentially be avoided by exploiting SL.

Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med

 10981128, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/med.21354 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [01/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
POTENTIAL CLINICAL USES OF CDK INHIBITORS
1163

3. CDK INHIBITORS CAN ENHANCE THE EFFECTIVENESS OF CURRENT
CHEMOTHERAPEUTICS

Although classical chemotherapeutics continue to dominate the clinical treatment of cancer,
their limited efficacy, side effects, and susceptibility to drug resistance collectively complicate
their use. Most of these compounds inhibit the functioning of the mitotic spindle, block DNA
synthesis, or induce DNA damage. All of these processes lead to the activation of checkpoints
followed by cell cycle arrest, during which the damage they cause may be repaired and drug
resistance may be induced. Combination therapies are generally believed to avoid these problems,
and in recent years a number of studies have demonstrated that combination therapies
involving CDK inhibitors can have remarkable effects. Several studies examining different drug
combinations have revealed synergistic effects that can be enhanced by precisely controlling the
sequence and schedule on which the various agents are administered.
Flavopiridol was the first pan-selective CDK inhibitor and the most extensively studied. It
has been tested in combination with diverse classical chemotherapeutic agents, resulting in the
identification of some combination therapies that are currently undergoing clinical trials. For
instance, it was shown to enhance the anticancer effect of paclitaxel, a microtubule-interfering
agent that inhibits mitosis.62 Paclitaxel monotherapy induced a transient increase in cyclin B1
expression and CDK1 activation followed by mitotic exit without cytokinesis. Subsequent inhibition
of CDK1 using flavopiridol accelerated mitotic exit, activated caspase-3, and induced
PARP cleavage. Interestingly, the two drugs had antagonistic effects if the order of treatment
was reversed by applying flavopiridol before paclitaxel because flavopiridol pretreatment
prevented mitotic entry. This finding demonstrates the importance of applying combination
therapies in the correct sequence.62 Similar results were obtained when using flavopiridol in
combination with docetaxel, a semisynthetic paclitaxel analogue.63 In another example, SN-38,
an active metabolite of the DNA topoisomerase I inhibitor CPT-11, induced p21 expression
and G2 arrest in the HCT-116 gastric cancer cell line without activating apoptosis; this failure
of apoptotic induction could be overcome by subsequent treatment with flavopiridol,64 which
caused the activation of caspase-3 and the cleavage of p21 and X-linked inhibitor of apoptosis
(XIAP). A third example is the combination of flavopiridol with gemcitabine, a ribonucleotide
reductase inhibitor. In several cases, gemcitabine monotherapy has led to resistance due to upregulation
of the mRNA and protein expression of the ribonucleotide reductase M2 subunit.65
Flavopiridol treatment suppressed this resistance by downregulating the expression of the transcription
factor E2F-1 in gemcitabine-treated cells, causing a reduction in the expression of the
ribonucleotide reductase M2 subunit.65
Based on this body of evidence, clinical trials on a range of combination therapies involving
various CDK inhibitors have been initiated (see Supporting Information Table I). The
extensively investigated CDK inhibitor flavopiridol has been the subject of several such studies,
usually in combination with DNA targeting agents with which it exhibited strong synergistic
effects in preclinical settings. Given the known involvement of certain CDKs in DNA damage
repair processes,66 it is tempting to speculate that these synergies could be due to cell death
arising from the blockage of DNA repair. There have also been several clinical trials involving
the use of microtubule-interfering agents in conjunction with CDK inhibitors because such
combinations have yielded promising results in animal models.62, 67
In addition to classical chemotherapeutics, CDK inhibitors are being tested as components
of therapeutic cocktails featuring more recently developed molecularly targeted drugs (including
biologics) for which clear mutual potentiation has been observed in vitro or in vivo. The striking
results obtained in these models support the hypothesis that simultaneously blocking multiple
signaling pathways may confer superior clinical efficacy. Therefore, various combinations of
CDK inhibitors with inhibitors of mitogen transducing kinases (both receptor and cytoplasmic

Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med

 10981128, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/med.21354 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [01/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1164
VYMETALOV ˇ A AND KRY ´ STOF ˇ

kinases), proteasome inhibitors, or antiestrogens have been designed for clinical evaluation (see
Supporting Information Table I).
The examples mentioned above clearly show that CDK inhibitors can potentiate the activity
of current chemotherapeutic agents. However, more effective anticancer strategies could
potentially be developed by specifically targeting individual cancer-related genes in order to
exploit SL interactions in patients whose genetic background is known.

4. SYNTHETIC LETHALITY OF CDK INHIBITORS IN THE TREATMENT OF SPECIFIC
TUMOR DISEASES

A. CDK1/2 and Phosphatidylinositol-3´-Kinase (PI3K)

Glioblastoma multiforme is the most common and aggressive astrocytoma, and has poor prognostic
outcomes despite the availability of several multimodal therapies. Almost half of all
astrocytomas are characterized by an amplification of the epidermal growth factor receptor
(EGFR), which subsequently overactivates PI3K leading to a deregulation of the protein kinase
B (Akt)/mammalian target of rapamycin (mTOR) signaling pathway.68 The malignant
conversion is also influenced by gain of function mutations in PI3Kα and loss of function mutations
in tumor suppressor phosphatase and tensin homolog (PTEN), which negatively regulates
PI3K activity.69 Early efforts to develop targeted glioblastoma treatments largely focused on
small molecule inhibitors of EGFR, PI3K, or mTOR. This approach yielded disappointing
results, inducing cytostatic effects rather than cell death. However, the screening of inhibitors of
PI3K isoforms led to the identification of the imidazopyridine PI-75, which effectively induced
apoptosis in glioma cell lines expressing wild-type PTEN without affecting PTEN mutant cell
lines.70 Treatment of a wild-type PTEN cell line with the PTEN inhibitor bisperoxovanadium
in combination with PI-75 caused increased phosphorylation of Akt and attenuated cell death
without affecting G2/M arrest. Surprisingly, computational studies indicated that PI-75 is also
a strong inhibitor of CDK1 and 2.70 While the inhibition of single CDKs (CDK1 or CDK2)
or CDK1 and PI3Kα had no impact on apoptosis in glioma cells expressing wild-type PTEN,
combined CDK2 and PI3Kα inhibition increased cell death, albeit to a lesser extent than was
observed following PI-75 treatment. This finding was confirmed by siRNA experiments, in
which the silencing of CDK1 or 2 alone after treatment with a PI3Kα inhibitor did not influence
apoptosis in glioma cells expressing wild-type PTEN. This may indicate that CDK1 can
compensate for the absence of CDK2 and vice versa.71 However, the simultaneous silencing
of both CDKs significantly reduced the viability of cells treated with the PI3Kα inhibitor. In
keeping with this finding, overexpression of CDK1 and 2 attenuated apoptosis in glioma cells
expressing wild-type PTEN. Similarly, a combination of the CDK1/2 inhibitor roscovitine with
a PI3Kα inhibitor reduced tumor size in mice xenografts more effectively than monotherapy
with either agent alone. All of these results suggest that it should be possible to use combination
therapies based on CDK1/2 and PI3K inhibitors to treat patients with gliomas expressing
wild-type PTEN.

B. CDK1/2/9 and MYC

Neuroblastomas are embryonal tumors that arise from the sympathetic nervous system and
are the second most common cause of cancer-related deaths in children.72 They are associated
with a range of molecular changes including MYCN amplification, which is found in 20–30%
of all neuroblastomas and is linked to advanced disease with bad prognosis.73 As a ligandindependent
transcription factor, MYCN is very challenging to drug. Interestingly, CDK2 was
shown to have a strong effect on the viability of MYCN-amplified neuroblastomas: its silencing

Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med

 10981128, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/med.21354 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [01/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
POTENTIAL CLINICAL USES OF CDK INHIBITORS
1165

using siRNA or shRNA induced apoptosis in MYCN-amplified neuroblastoma cell lines.74
However, the simultaneous silencing of MYCN and CDK2 had no impact on cell viability,
suggesting that these two proteins have an SL relationship. Subsequent experiments demonstrated
that both roscovitine and the related compound CR8 are potent inducers of apoptosis
in MYCN-positive cells but have no effects in MYCN-negative neuroblastoma lines.74, 75
Various other cancers overexpress the closely related MYC oncogene, which encodes a
transcription factor that regulates the expression of genes controlling cell growth, division, and
apoptosis.76 Using a panel of fibroblast human cell lines expressing nine common oncogenes, it
was shown that MYC-overexpressing cells were highly sensitive to the induction of apoptosis by
purvalanol A (a CDK inhibitor related to roscovitine).77 Importantly, this sensitivity correlated
well with the strength of the cells’ expression of MYC. Artificially induced Bcl-2 overexpression
prevented cell death in both normal and MYC-overexpressing cells treated with purvalanol A,
demonstrating that the apoptosis observed in drug-treated cells was due to mitochondrial depolarization.
This effect was attributed to a drug-induced destabilization of survivin, an inhibitor
of apoptosis whose activity depends on phosphorylation by CDK1.78 The anticancer efficacy of
purvalanol A was also confirmed in mouse models of lymphoma and hepatoblastoma, further
supporting the proposed interaction between CDK1 and MYC.77
The SL interaction betweenMYC and CDK1 could potentially be exploited in the treatment
of triple-negative breast cancer, which is resistant to drugs targeting the HER2, estrogen, and
progesterone receptors.79, 80 CDK1 silencing using siRNA decreased the viability of triplenegative
breast cancer cell lines and suppressed tumor growth in mice xenografts.79 Two small
molecule CDK inhibitors, purvalanol A and dinaciclib, induced significant apoptosis in several
triple-negative cell lines with elevated MYC expression as well as in related mouse xenograft
models.80 CDK1 is not the only CDK that has a synthetic lethal relationship with MYC:
studies on hepatocellular carcinomas revealed that CDK9 was required for their survival and
its pharmacological or shRNA-mediated inhibition caused robust antitumor effects whose
magnitude correlated with MYC expression levels.81
It can be difficult to unravel synthetic lethal relationships involving CDKs because of
the broad specificity patterns of established CDK inhibitors and because these proteins exhibit
pronounced functional redundancy such that one CDK can often compensate for deficiencies in
the activity of another. However, a remarkable study in which CDK4, CDK2, and CDK1 were
inhibited specifically and separately using either RNAi or small molecule inhibitors showed that
only CDK1 inhibition rapidly decreased the viability of MYC-dependent cells.82 The suggested
mechanism of SL between CDK1 and MYC is based on the induction of mitotic catastrophe
by CDK1 depletion, which may promote MYC-induced replication stress and subsequently
activate checkpoint signaling, resulting in cell death.

C. CDK6 and VHL

The inactivation of the Von Hippel Lindau (VHL) tumor suppressor gene, which serves as
a regulator of hypoxia-inducible factor α (HIF-α), is a frequent hallmark of clear cell renal
carcinomas (RCC).83 In the presence of oxygen (normoxia), HIF-α becomes hydroxylated at
one or two prolyl residues to form a binding site for VHL, a component of the ubiquitin ligase
complex that directs the polyubiquitinylation of HIF-α. On the other hand, a lack of oxygen
leads to an accumulation of HIF-α, which then binds HIF-β. The HIF-α/β heterodimer acts
as a transcriptional factor of genes involved in acute or chronic adaptation to hypoxia such as
vascular endothelial growth factor (VEGF), platelet-derived growth factor B (PDGF-B), tumor
growth factor α (TGFα), and erythropoietin.83 Loss of VHL leads to an activation of kinases
such as EGFR, c-Met, VEGFR, or PDGFR, which can support invasiveness, angiogenesis, and

Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med

 10981128, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/med.21354 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [01/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
1166
VYMETALOV ˇ A AND KRY ´ STOF ˇ

metastasis.84 Renal tumors generally do not respond to conventional treatment and therefore
require novel therapies. The scope for specifically targeting VHL-negative cells was investigated
using isogenic cell lines derived from RCC patients of different VHL status.84 Focused silencing
of individual kinases resulted in the identification of three genes that reduced the viability of
VHL-/- RCC cell lines: c-Met, CDK6, and MAP2K1. A synthetic lethal interaction between
VHL and CDK6 was then confirmed by experiments using a small molecule CDK4/6 inhibitor
(CAS 546102-60-7), which only blocked the growth of VHL-/- cells. This finding suggests that
CDK6 inhibitors could potentially be useful in the treatment of VHL-/- RCC.

D. CDK4 and K-Ras

Given the role of CDK4/6 in the conjunction of mitogenic signaling and cell cycle regulation,
it was not a surprise when CDK4 was revealed as a promising target in cancers overexpressing
K-Ras.85 Inducible overexpression of K-Ras in mouse embryonic fibroblasts was found to
overcome the typical replicative senescence response of cells exposed to culture shock, while
CDK4 ablation restored this senescence. K-Ras-positive tumor cell lines were sensitive to
CDK4 silencing while cell lines lacking K-Ras were unaffected. Moreover, the induction of
K-Ras expression in murine xenograft models with a loss of CDK4 significantly reduced their
tumor burden, and all of the tumors that did arise were benign. It was also demonstrated that
K-Ras-positive cells with a loss of CDK4 undergo senescence in a way that is normally observed
only in lung cells. Mice with induced K-Ras overexpression were treated with the CDK4-specific
inhibitor PD0332991. After 30 days, less than 20% of all animals developed lesions compared
to 75% for control mice. Biochemical analysis revealed a decrease in Rb phosphorylation at
serines 807 and 811 in the treated mice; both of these residues are targets of CDK4. However,
no senescence response was detected in cells treated with a CDK4 inhibitor, suggesting that
CDK4 activity was not adequately suppressed. It would therefore be desirable to develop more
potent CDK4 inhibitors and test their usefulness in the treatment of K-Ras-positive NSCLC.
The synthetic lethal relationship between K-Ras and CDK4 was subsequently observed in a
K-Ras overexpressing NSCLC cell line, in which CDK4 silencing reduced cell proliferation, as
well as in a murine xenograft model, in which it inhibited tumor growth.86

E. CDK5/12 and PARP

As noted in the introduction the SL relationships that have been most widely exploited in
the clinic are those associated with PARP inhibition. Turner et al. searched for additional SL
interactions between PARP and DNA damage response proteins by performing a screen using
an siRNA library targeting 779 human kinases and kinase-associated genes in a breast cancer
cell line.87 This approach yielded six on-target hits, the most notable of which was CDK5.
The SL relationship between PARP and CDK5 was subsequently confirmed by experiments
using HeLa cells treated with a PARP inhibitor: CDK5-silenced cells were more sensitive than
controls to DNA-damaging agents such as camptothecin and cisplatin. CDK5 silencing in cells
treated with the PARP inhibitor caused a striking increase in γ H2AX phosphorylation and
an increase in the abundance of RAD51 foci even in the absence of exogenous DNA damage.
Thus, CDK5 silencing in PARP-inhibited HeLa cells causes failures of SSB repair that lead
to DSB formation but has no effect on HR or NHEJ. Interestingly, when CDK5-silenced
cells were irradiated, they exhibited radiation-resistant DNA synthesis and an unusually high
proportion of cells were found to be in mitosis after irradiation, suggesting that CDK5 controls
an intra S-phase checkpoint that normally prevents mitotic progression in cells with DNA
damage. While its precise function in the various cell cycle checkpoints remains unclear, it may
act via SCF ubiquitin ligase or some noncatalytic interaction with DNA-damage kinases. In

Medicinal Research Reviews DOI 10.1002/med

 10981128, 2015, 6, Downloaded from https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/med.21354 by Cas - Shanghaitech University, Wiley Online Library on [01/09/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
POTENTIAL CLINICAL USES OF CDK INHIBITORS
1167

conclusion, PARP inhibition causes the accumulation of SSBs; when this is paired with a failure
of an intra-S-phase checkpoint due to the absence of CDK5, the result is an increased rate of
replication fork collapse that leads to cell death. These results suggest that PARP inhibitors
may be particularly effective in the treatment of patients with CDK5 loss of function mutations.
They also suggest that in addition to their uses in treating patients with BRCA1 or BRCA2
deficiencies, PARP inhibitors may be useful for other malignancies when applied in combination
with CDK5 inhibitors.
In an effort to identify even more genes for which loss of function might predict sensitivity
to PARP inhibitors, Bajrami et al. performed a genome-wide synthetic lethal screen using the
PARP inhibitor olaparib.88 Their analysis showed that the cytotoxicity of olaparib is governed
by the status of the DNA damage response apparatus as well as genes that proofread chromatin
remodeling and regulate sister chromatid cohesion. Of the genes identified in this work,
CDK12 stands out as a potential predictive biomarker for responsiveness to PARP1/2 inhibitors.
CDK12 is a regulator of RNA polymerase II and is also important in HR. High-grade
serous ovarian cancer (HGS-OVCa), a disease characterized by a high frequency of familial
and somatic BRCA mutations, was selected as a model in which to evaluate the synthetic
lethal relationship between PARP1/2 and CDK12 based on its susceptibility to olaparib after
carboplatin treatment. The loss of CDK12 function may sensitize HGS-OV cells to PARP1/2
inhibitors because it reduces the expression of key DNA repair genes such as BRCA1, FANCI,
FANCD2, and ATR, rendering the cell deficient in HR.88, 89 Consequently, the SSBs induced
by PARP1/2 inhibition are not effectively repaired, leading to cell death.

5. CONCLUSION

For a long time, attempts to treat patients with tumors could be likened to “tilting at windmills”
due to the heterogeneity of cancer and related diseases. While treatments with classical
chemotherapeutics often initially provide good outcomes, different patterns of resistance appear
in many patients. In addition, these drugs are characterized by high levels of general toxicity
and severe side effects. However, developments in genetics and genomic technologies have made
it possible to explore the genetic basis of diverse tumors, leading to the identification of novel
molecular targets whose specific inhibition offers the potential for more effective treatment that
can overcome resistance. In recent years, many drugs targeting specific cancer-related proteins
have been developed, several of which have been approved for clinical use. Although no CDK
inhibitor has yet been approved for cancer therapy several phase III clinical trials involving
such agents are underway. There has been quite a large gap between the development of the first
CDK inhibitors and their use in phase II/III trials for several reasons including their low therapeutic
indices (especially in monotherapy) and a lack of robust criteria for selecting patients
who are likely to respond well to such therapies. Hopefully, these problems could potentially
be avoided by exploiting SL. Studies on this phenomenon, which was first demonstrated in
yeasts before being explored further in cell lines and model organisms, have revealed a range of
gene–gene interactions that could potentially be exploited to develop novel targeted therapies
that will make it possible to effectively treat previously incurable tumors and provide more
effective therapies, perhaps based on CDK inhibition, with fewer side effects for other cancers.

