6
news & views

interfaces, designed to be semipermeable
to topological charge, thus leading to
sophisticated forms of control over mobile,
quantized information carriers. Artificial
spin ice could be explored as a platform for
neuromorphic ‘memcomputing’, in which
the material functions as an interacting,
collective memory storage unit capable of
computation within the memory in absence
of a logical unit9
. Reprogrammable band
structures for magnons10, manipulation
of superconductive vortices by pinning to
magnetic monopoles4
, and coupling of the
magnetic ensemble to transport11 are other
promising directions for applications. And
the functionality for all these potential
technological developments is strongly

dependent on the capability to manipulate
the microstate directly.
A complex system is defined by structure
and ensemble. Much of the appeal of
artificial spin ices has, since the beginning,
relied on the control of the structure2
.
While not quite the dynamic Maxwell’s
demon of our dinner of pioneers, the
technique demonstrated by Gartside and
co-workers finally opens the way to a
much-needed capability for static, local,
reliable and accurate manipulation of
the ensemble. ❐

Cristiano Nisoli
Teoretical Division and Institute for Materials
Science, Los Alamos National Laboratory,

Los Alamos, NM, USA.
e-mail: cristiano@lanl.gov

Published online: 20 November 2017
https://doi.org/10.1038/s41565-017-0021-y

References
1. Gartside, J. C. et al. Nat. Nanotech. https://doi.org/10.1038/
s41565-017-0002-1 (2017).
2. Nisoli, C., Kapaklis, V. & Schifer, P. Nat. Phys. 13,
200–203 (2017).
3. Farhan, A. et al. Nat. Phys. 9, 375–382 (2013).
4. Wang, Y.-L. et al. Science 352, 962–966 (2016).
5. Möller, G. & Moessner, R. Phys. Rev. B 80, 140409(R) (2009).
6. Zhang, S. et al. Nature 500, 553–557 (2013).
7. Anghinolf, L. et al. Nat. Commun. 6, 8278 (2015).
8. Nisoli, C. et al. Phys. Rev. Lett. 105, 047205 (2010).
9. Di Ventra, M. & Pershin, Y. V. Nat. Phys. 9, 200–202 (2013).
10. Iacocca, E. et al. Phys. Rev. B 93, 134420 (2016).
11. Le, B. L. et al. Phys. Rev. B 95, 060405 (2017).

Nature Nanotechnology | VOL 13 | JANUARY 2018 | 5–10 | www.nature.com/naturenanotechnology

© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

CANCER NANOMEDICINE

A synthetic lethal bullet

Nanoparticles loaded with paclitaxel and nintedanib induce synthetic lethality in endometrial cancer cells.

Christian Rolfo and Elisa Giovannetti

Conventional chemotherapeutic drugs
like paclitaxel and doxorubicin
cause cell death by affecting cellular
processes that are more active in tumours
but that exist in normal cells as well: because
of this, they are highly toxic, imposing limits
to their doses. For more than twenty years,
nanomedicine has focused on developing
nanoparticles as simple drug-delivery
vehicles that can drive chemotherapy drugs
towards tumours. Now, the new frontier
in the field is represented by the so-called
molecularly targeted cancer therapies.
These are potentially more effective and less
harmful to normal cells than conventional
chemotherapies since they are designed
to specifically interact with receptors and
signalling molecules that play a pivotal role
in cancer cell proliferation, and to target key
tumour-promoting micro-environmental
factors. The latest formulations exploit
synthetic lethal interactions between
tumour-specific aberrations and additional
molecular processes. Yet, the efficacy
of these therapeutic molecules remains
affected by limited targeted delivery. Now,
reporting in Nature Nanotechnology, Ebeid
and co-authors propose an innovative
approach to generate ‘synthetic lethal
bullets’ with high tumour-delivery
efficiency, which combines conventional
and molecularly targeted anticancer agents
with an innovative nanoparticle technology
aimed at shrinking endometrial tumours1
.

Drug-delivery nanoparticles consist of
macromolecular materials coupled with an
active principle — a drug or a biologically
active moiety — that is dissolved, entrapped,
or encapsulated within the macromolecular
shell or absorbed to its surface2
. As an

example, Abraxane, or nab-paclitaxel, is the
first commercial-drug-loaded nanoparticle
and consists of human serum albumin
nanoparticles containing paclitaxel. It
appeared on the market at the beginning of
2005, and it is now approved for different

+ =

Microtubule stabilization
by paclitaxel
Decreased p38 activation by
paclitaxel and nintedanib
Synthetic
lethality

Nanoparticle
Leaky tumour vasculature

Mutated TP53
cancer cells

Normal vasculature

G2/M checkpoint
abrogation

Mitotic catastrophe
and cell death

TPGS Paclitaxel
PLGA Nintedanib

Fig. 1 | TPGS–PLGA nanoparticles loaded with nintedanib and paclitaxel extravasate through the leaky
tumour vasculature and reach tumour cells. Paclitaxel induces microtubule stabilization. Cancer cells
harbouring mutations in TP53 could activate p38 to compensate p53 loss, leading to cell cycle arrest.
p38 inhibition by nintedanib causes synthetic lethality by G2/M checkpoint abrogation, which triggers
mitotic catastrophe in TP53 mutated cancer cells and cell death. Structure of p38 retrieved from Protein
Data Bank: 1WFC. The authors collaborated with J. Pinto Oblitas to create the figure.
7

news & views

Nature Nanotechnology | VOL 13 | JANUARY 2018 | 5–10 | www.nature.com/naturenanotechnology

© 2018 Macmillan Publishers Limited, part of Springer Nature. All rights reserved.

tumour types, including breast, lung and
pancreatic cancer.
Traditionally, the goal of nanoparticlebased
chemotherapy has been to decrease
normal tissue toxicity by improving drug
specificity to tumours. The so-called
EPR effect (enhanced permeability and
retention) permits passive accumulation
into the tumour interstitium thanks to
its defective vasculature and ineffective
lymphatic drainage. The heterogeneity
of vascular permeability, however, limits
nanoparticle penetration — most large-sized
nanoparticles achieve only a suboptimal
delivery and lack cytotoxic effects against
cancer cells containing certain single-gene
mutations that could be specifically targeted.
The elegant approach reported by
Ebeid and co-authors pieces together this
challenging puzzle. First, in choosing
Food and Drug Administration-approved
biocompatible poly(lactic-co-glycolic acid)
(PLGA) at a monomer ratio of 75:25 and
tocopherol polyethylene glycol succinate
(TPGS) as surfactant, they synthesize a
nanoparticle that allows better drug uptake
and accumulation, while reducing drug
efflux. TPGS acts as an inhibitor of the
permeability glycoprotein (P-glycoprotein),
which confers resistance by mediating
the ATP-dependent efflux of a wide
array of anticancer drugs3
. Moreover,
they encapsulate, for the first time, the
conventional chemotherapeutic agent
paclitaxel and the novel angiokinase
inhibitor BIBF 1120, known as nintedanib.
The latter is a potent triple receptor
tyrosine kinase inhibitor that targets
multiple tyrosine kinases and has already
demonstrated relevant clinical activity in
ovarian and lung cancer patients when
combined with docetaxel or paclitaxel4,5
.
However, these initial trials highlighted
the existence of adverse effects, suggesting
the need for better criteria to select those
patients who will take full advantage of the

proposed treatment. With regard to this
point, an additional strength of the work by
Ebeid et al. is the choice of a combinatory
nanoformulation that promotes synthetic
lethality specifically in cells with mutations
causing loss-of-function of the TP53
gene. Synthetic lethality typically arises
when a combination of deficiencies in the
expression of two or more genes leads to
cell death6
. In this case, mechanistic insights
obtained in vitro and in vivo indicate that
combination of paclitaxel with nintedanib
induces synergistic cell death. Cells with
TP53 loss-of-function rely on the p38
pathway to enter the G2/M checkpoint — a
control step in the cell cycle that ensures
DNA integrity before mitosis — and avoid
cell death linked to the mitotic catastrophe.
Treatment with paclitaxel stabilizes mitotic
microtubules and its combination with
nintedanib reduces p38 activation, which
leads cells to bypass the G2/M checkpoint
and induces a mitotic catastrophe.
Endometrial cancer is one of the only two
common cancers with increasing incidence
and mortality and thus urgently needs
more effective treatments such as rationally
designed multi-drug regimens, similar to the
one proposed in this study. Of the different
types of endometrial cancers, one of the
most aggressive is uterine serous carcinoma,
where TP53 is mutated in 93% of the cases.
However, the clinical relevance of this study
reaches beyond the applicability of these
findings to endometrial cancer. In fact, TP53
is the most frequently mutated gene in all
cancers, and a recent study demonstrated that
its mutations are clonal, meaning that they
occur early in tumourigenesis and are present
in the majority of cancer cells7
. Future studies
on ovarian and lung cancers selected for TP53
driver mutations could indeed pave the way
to the development of personalized medicine
strategies for different tumour types.
Nanoparticles present hope for improving
cancer treatments by acting at least at two

main levels: conferring new properties to a
pharmaceutical agent (increased stability,
modified pharmacokinetics and decreased
toxicity) and driving the agent directly to
the tumour, harnessing synthetic lethal
interactions with targeted nanoparticles.
The nanoparticles developed by Ebeid
and co-authors have great potential for
anticancer drug delivery and tumour
targeting in TP53-mutated endometrial
cancer, because they can exploit all the
above-mentioned effects, as illustrated in
Fig. 1. Of course, only new experiments and
clinical trials will tell us whether, a century
after Paul Ehrlich’s seminal hypothesis on
chemotherapeutic magic bullets8
 and the
first description of the synthetic lethality
phenomenon by Calvin Bridges9
, we can
finally begin to use successful nanoparticlebased
synthetic lethal bullets. ❐



