Translational Cancer Mechanisms and Therapy

Polo-like Kinase 1 Inhibition as a Therapeutic
Approach to Selectively Target BRCA1-Deficient
Cancer Cells by Synthetic Lethality Induction

Sofía Carbajosa1
, María Florencia Pansa1
, Natalia S. Paviolo2
, Andres M. Castellaro  3
,
Diego L. Andino4, Ayelen D. Nigra  3
, Iris Alejandra García1
, Ana C. Racca3
,
Lucía Rodriguez-Berdini3
, Virginia Angiolini1
, Laura Guantay1
, Florencia Villafanez ~ 1
,
María Belen Federico  2
, María Celeste Rodríguez-Baili3
, Beatriz L. Caputto3
,
Gerard Drewes5
, Kevin P. Madauss6
, Israel Gloger7
, Elmer Fernandez4, German A. Gil  3
,
Jose Luis Bocco  1
, Vanesa Gottifredi2
, and Gaston Soria  1

Abstract

Purpose: BRCA1 and BRCA2 deficiencies are widespread
drivers of human cancers that await the development of
targeted therapies. We aimed to identify novel synthetic lethal
relationships with therapeutic potential using BRCA-deficient
isogenic backgrounds.
Experimental Design: We developed a phenotypic screening
technology to simultaneously search for synthetic lethal
(SL) interactions in BRCA1- and BRCA2-deficient contexts. For
validation, we developed chimeric spheroids and a dualtumor
xenograft model that allowed the confirmation of SL
induction with the concomitant evaluation of undesired cytotoxicity
on BRCA-proficient cells. To extend our results using
clinical data, we performed retrospective analysis on The
Cancer Genome Atlas (TCGA) breast cancer database.
Results: The screening of a kinase inhibitors library revealed
that Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) inhibition triggers strong SL
induction in BRCA1-deficient cells. Mechanistically, we found

no connection between the SL induced by PLK1 inhibition and
PARP inhibitors. Instead, we uncovered that BRCA1 downregulation
and PLK1 inhibition lead to aberrant mitotic phenotypes
with altered centrosomal duplication and cytokinesis,
which severely reduced the clonogenic potential of these cells.
The penetrance of PLK1/BRCA1 SL interaction was validated
using several isogenic and nonisogenic cellular models, chimeric
spheroids, and mice xenografts. Moreover, bioinformatic
analysis revealed high-PLK1 expression in BRCA1-deficient
tumors, a phenotype that was consistently recapitulated by
inducing BRCA1 deficiency in multiple cell lines as well as in
BRCA1-mutant cells.
Conclusions: We uncovered an unforeseen addiction of
BRCA1-deficient cancer cells to PLK1 expression, which provides
a new means to exploit the therapeutic potential of PLK1
inhibitors in clinical trials, by generating stratification schemes
that consider this molecular trait in patient cohorts.

Introduction

BRCA1 and BRCA2 have multiple convergent and divergent
functions (1). Initially, it was considered that BRCA1 and BRCA2
had relevance only in hereditary types of breast and ovarian
cancers (2, 3). However, a growing set of recent evidence demonstrated
that mutations or epigenetic downregulation of BRCA
genes are also frequently found in sporadic cancers, the acquired
deficiency in homologous recombination (HR) being the underlying
mechanism of tumorigenesis (4). Moreover, several recent
clinical studies have shown that BRCA1/BRCA2–deficient phenotypes
are found with high prevalence not only in breast and
ovarian cancers, but also in pancreatic, prostatic, and other types
of cancers (5).
An iconic successful case to target BRCA-deficient cancers was
the development of PARP inhibitors (PARPi). After a decade of
intense investigation and substantial investment from companies,
three PARPi became available for clinical use: olaparib from
AstraZeneca approved in 2015, rucaparib from Clovis approved in
2016, and niraparib from TESARO approved in 2017 (6, 7). Time
will be required to weigh the success of PARPi in the clinic.
Nonetheless, given the vast incidence of BRCA-deficiencies in

1

Centro de Investigaciones en Bioquímica Clínica e Inmunología, CIBICICONICET,
Departamento de Bioquímica Clínica, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas,
Universidad Nacional de Cordoba, C  ordoba, Argentina.  2
Fundacion Instituto
Leloir, Buenos Aires, Argentina. 3
Centro de Investigaciones en Química Biologica
de Cordoba, CIQUIBIC-CONICET, Facultad de Ciencias Químicas, Universidad
Nacional de Cordoba, C  ordoba, Argentina.  4
CIDIE-CONICET, Universidad
Catolica de C  ordoba, C  ordoba, Argentina.  5
Cellzome AG, Heidelberg, Germany. 6

GlaxoSmithKline-Trust in Science, Global Health R&D, Upper Providence,
Pennsylvania. 7
GlaxoSmithKline-Trust in Science, Global Health R&D, Stevenage,
United Kingdom.
Note: Supplementary data for this article are available at Clinical Cancer
Research Online (http://clincancerres.aacrjournals.org/).
S. Carbajosa and M.F. Pansa contributed equally to this article.
Corresponding Authors: Gaston Soria, Universidad Nacional de C  ordoba, Av.
Haya de la Torrre s/n, Cordoba, Argentina. Phone/Fax: 54-351-5353850, ext.
55316; E-mail: gsoria@fcq.unc.edu.ar; and Vanesa Gottifredi, IIBBA, Fundacion
Instituto Leloir, CONICET, Av. Patricias Argentinas 435, C1405 BWE, Buenos
Aires, Argentina. E-mail: VGottifredi@leloir.org.ar
Clin Cancer Res 2019;25:4049–62
doi: 10.1158/1078-0432.CCR-18-3516
2019 American Association for Cancer Research.

Clinical
Cancer
Research

www.aacrjournals.org 4049Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/clincancerres/article-pdf/25/13/4049/2053157/4049.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
human cancers, there is a major need to develop new targeted
therapies that exploit such deficiencies from different angles. This
is also particularly relevant given that many types of resistance
mechanisms to PARPi are already being described (8).
In a cancer therapy context, synthetic lethality (SL) can be
defined as the selective toxicity triggered by a given treatment on
a cancerous cell with a given genetic defect in comparison with the
healthy cells of the patient. Despite its great potential (9), SL
remains largely unexploited in cancer drug discovery. This could
be attributed, at least in part, to the lack of suitable screening
technologies that comprehensively cover critical variables for SL
induction, such as: (i) sufficient experiment length for SL to
manifest; (ii) isogenicity between the cell lines compared, to
unequivocally attribute the SL induction to a given genetic defect;
(iii) broad coverage of the cell lines heterogeneity, to avoid
misleading conclusions due to clonal events; (iv) high sensitivity
and comparability, to unveil small differences in cell survival
between the cell lines compared in the screening. Most of the
survival assays currently used for cancer drug discovery are based
on metabolic readouts such as ATP levels. Because these methods
involve measuring technologies with great throughput capacity,
they have become the gold standard for high-throughput screenings.
However, such technologies have several biology-related
setbacks that make them unsuitable for SL-based screenings. For
instance, metabolic readouts show poor correlation with the
absolute number of cells and become less sensitive when cells
reach high confluence in long-term assays (10–12). Moreover,
these methods do not provide information at single-cell level.
Thus, all comparisons must be performed between different
wells/plates, with a substantial increase in variability and loss of
comparability and sensitivity.
In this article, by combining fluorescent tagging, lentiviral
transduction of shRNAs against BRCA1 and BRCA2 and highthroughput
flow cytometry, we developed an SL-based phenotypic
screening assay, which tackles all the critical points mentioned
above. Then, we used our assay to screen the second
generation of a public library of 680 kinase inhibitors (PKIS2).
We found that the inhibition of Polo-like kinase 1 (PLK1) triggers
strong SL in BRCA1-deficient cancer cells. Because PLK1 is a
central kinase for mitotic progression that is currently under
clinical investigation (13), our results put forward valuable
evidence for positioning PLK1 inhibitors in patients' groups
characterized by alterations in BRCA1 expression.

Materials and Methods
DNA constructs and shRNA
iRFP-C1 was a gift from Michael Davidson and Vladislav
Verkhusha (National Magnetic High Field Laboratory, Tallahassee,
FL; Addgene plasmid #54786; ref. 14); shBRCA1
(TRCN0000010305, Sigma-Aldrich) was cloned into pLKO.1-
TRC vector through EcoRI and AgeI restriction sites; and
shSCR-pLKO.1 was described previously (15). shSCR-plenti
(TR30021) and shPLK1-plenti (TL320457 A) were acquired from
Origene. pDRGFP and pCBASceI were a gift from Maria Jasin
(Memorial Sloan Kettering Cancer Center, New York, NY; ref. 16).

Antibodies
Primary antibodies used were as follows: a-BRCA1 (Oncogene
Research-Ab1); KU70 (#ab3114); a-PLK1 (#4513S); a-Tubulin
(#T9026); g-tubulin (Sigma-Aldrich); phalloidin-Alexa Fluor 488
(Molecular Probes); a gH2AX Ser 139, Upstate (Millipore, clone
JBW301); a 53BP1 (#SC-22760), a-pPLK1T210 (#9111). Secondary
antibodies used were goat a-mouse IRDye 680RD and goat
a-rabbit IRDye 800CW from LI-COR Biosciences; a-mouse/
rabbit–conjugated Cy2/Cy3 antibodies (Jackson ImmunoResearch).
Nuclei were stained with DAPI (Sigma).

Cell lines and cell culture
HCT116p21/ cells were kindly provided by Bert Vogelstein
(Johns Hopkins Medicine, Baltimore, MD). V-C8 cell lines were
supplied by Bernard Lopez (Institut Gustave Roussy, Villejuif,
France). All the remaining cells used in this study were obtained
from ATCC. Cell culture was performed in DMEM medium
(Thermo Fisher Scientific) supplemented with 10% FBS (GIBCONZ)
and 1% penicillin/streptomycin. Control for Mycoplasma contamination
was performed periodically with a PCR-based method
with internal loading control. Cell lines were used for experimentation
for no more than 20 passages from the main frozen stock.

Generation of fluorescent-tagged stable cell lines
Transfection protocols were performed using JetPrime
(Polyplus-transfection) according to the manufacturer's
instructions. Multiple rounds of cell sorting (3–5) were performed
(FACS Aria II, BD Bioscience). The lentiviral titer was
determined by serial dilution and transduction of HCT116
stably expressing iRFP cells followed by scanning using Odyssey
CLX System (LI-COR Biosciences). The minimum lentiviral
titer that promoted maximum survival of the transduced cells
after puromycin selection was determined. From the point of
maximum survival after puromycin addition, increasing lentiviral
titers were used. The points that show the higher downregulation
BRCA1 and BRCA2 by qPCR and Western blotting,
yet keeping similar proliferation rates to the shSCR-transduced
cell lines, were selected for the screening. The entire screening
phase was performed with cells that did not exceed 5 passages
after transduction to avoid the positive selection of cells with
higher BRCA levels.

Protein analysis
For direct Western blot analysis, samples were lysed in
commercial Laemmli Buffer (Bio-Rad) with reducing agent
2-mercaptoethanol. The detection and quantification were performed
with Odyssey CLX System (LI-COR Biosciences) using the
proprietary Image Studio Software.

Translational Relevance

In this work, we unveiled a strong synthetic lethal interaction
between the mitotic kinase PLK1 and the tumor suppressor
BRCA1. We confirmed the selective cytotoxicity of PLK1 inhibition
by developing in vitro and in vivo models that emulate
the coexistence of healthy BRCA1-proficient cells and BRCA1-
deficient cancer cells found in patients. These results were
extended by the clinical finding that tumors with low-BRCA1
expression, which are mostly basal like and triple negative for
hormone receptors, depict the highest levels of PLK1 expression.
Given that PLK1 inhibitors are currently being studied in
late-stage clinical trials, these preclinical and clinical discoveries
stimulate the design of clinical studies considering the BRCA1
status of patients as a marker of therapeutic response.

Carbajosa et al.

4050 Clin Cancer Res; 25(13) July 1, 2019 Clinical Cancer Research

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/clincancerres/article-pdf/25/13/4049/2053157/4049.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
qRT-PCR
tRNA was isolated using TRIzol reagent. Reverse transcription
was performed and BRCA2 mRNA levels were measured with
forward,-50
-AGGGCCACTTTCAAGAGACA30 and reverse,50
TAGTTGGGGTGGACCACTTG30
primers using the iQ SYBR Green
Supermix (Invitrogen). Relative expression levels were normalized
to GAPDH.

HR analysis
We used an HR assay generated previously in U2OS cells
containing an integrated HR reporter substrate DR-GFP (16) with
some modifications described previously (17).

Cell-cycle analysis and apoptosis assay
For cell cycle, cells were prepared as described previously (17).
Stained samples were subjected to FACS and data were analyzed
using FlowJo Software (FlowJo LLC). Cell apoptosis was detected
using the Annexin V Apoptosis Detection Kit (sc-4252 AK, Santa
Cruz Biotechnology).

Immunostaining and microscopy
Cells were fixed in 2% (w/v) paraformaldehyde (PFA)/2%
sucrose and permeabilized with 0.1% (v/v) Triton X-100 in PBS.
Blocking during 2 hours at room temperature in PBS 2% (v/v)
donkey serum (Sigma) was performed. Coverslips were incubated
for 1 hour in primary antibodies and then 1 hour in secondary
antibodies. Images were obtained with an inverted fluorescence
microscope (LEICA DMI8).

Chromosomal aberration analysis
Metaphase chromosome spreads were performed according to
described protocols (18). Samples were analyzed in an Applied
Imaging Cytovision 3.7. 50 metaphase spreads were used to
quantify chromosomal gaps, breaks, and exchanges.

Micronucleus assay
Cells seeded at low density were treated. After 24 hours, cells
were incubated with cytochalasin B (4.5 mg/mL, Sigma), and
micronucleus (MN) determination was performed as described
previously (19).

Clonogenic assays
Cells were plated in 24-well plates at seeding density of 2  104
cells per well and then treated for 6 days. The remaining cells were
trypsinized, counted, and seeded at extremely low density in 24-
well plates. After 10 days of culture, the media was removed, and
crystal violet staining solution was added for colony visualization.
The surviving fraction was determined as described in (20).

Generation of chimeric spheroids
The spheres were formed from an equimolar mixture of cells
(750 of each cell line) using the hanging drop system of Perfecta3D
96-well plates (3D Biomatrix). The partial medium exchange was
made every alternate day. After treatment, the spheres were harvested
via air displacement and incubated with 0.25% trypsin for 5
minutes and disintegrated mechanically. After the washing step,
the cells were acquired in FACSCanto II (BD Bioscience).

Double tumor xenograft model
A total of 1.5  106 cells were injected into each flanks of 6- to
8-week-old nude mice using a G27 syringe. When tumors reached

approximately 50 to 100 mm3
, animals were randomized
into treatment and control groups of 5 mice each. Volasertib
was diluted in ethanol, resuspended in 0.5% natrosol 250
hydroxyethyl-cellulose, and administered intragastrally via
gavage needle. The animals were weighed, and tumor volumes
were determined thrice a week using an Electronic Caliper
(Mitutoyo). The results were converted to tumor volume
(mm3
) by the formula length  width2  p/6. Ulcerations
that appeared in the fast-growing control tumors after day
14 were treated daily using povidone–iodine. At day 21 (tumor
volume  1,000 mm3
), mice were euthanized. Protocol
approved by CICUAL-UNC.

MDA-436 double tumor xenograft model
A modified protocol from (21) was used. Briefly, 5  106 MDA436
cells in a final volume of 100 mL of 50% complete media þ
50% Matrigel were xenografted into each of the fourth mammary
gland of 6- to 8-week-old nude mice using a G27 syringe. When
tumors reached an average size between approximately 50 to
100 mm3
, animals were randomized into treatment and control
groups. Protocol approved by CICUAL-UNC.

Statistical analysis
Graphs and statistical analysis were performed using GraphPad
Prism 5.0 (GraphPad Software), applying the Student t test and
ANOVA test as appropriate.

Results
Development of a survival screening method to identify SL
interactions in BRCA1- and BRCA2-deficient backgrounds
To identify novel SL interactions in BRCA-deficient contexts,
we developed a phenotypic screening pipeline using highthroughput
flow cytometry. We generated stable cell lines
tagged with fluorescent proteins that express shRNAs against
BRCA1 and BRCA2 (Fig. 1A). The knockdown approach using
lentiviral shRNA allowed us to work with transduced cellular
pools that avoid the bias of clonal selection yet keeping isogenicity.
The BRCA1 and BRCA2-deficient cell lines used in the
screening were generated by selecting a lentiviral transduction
titer that caused substantial knockdown, but without affecting
the proliferation proficiency (Fig. 1B). This is a critical issue,
because a hallmark of our screening platform is that BRCAdeficient
and BRCA-proficient cells are cocultured in the same
well. As such, each well behaves as a single screening unit with
an internal control (shSCR), allowing the assessment of SL in
both BRCA-deficient populations simultaneously (Fig. 1A). The
three cell lines are cocultured together for 6 days in the presence
of the tested compounds (Fig. 1C, left). The final readout is the
total cell number of each cell population, which is determined
by acquiring the complete well using an acoustic flow cytometer.
Three types of outcomes are possible for every tested
compound: (i) nontoxic, (ii) toxic but not selective, and (iii) SL
(Fig. 1C, right). To calibrate the sensitivity of the platform we
performed dose–response experiments using the PARPi olaparib
(Fig. 1D). In addition, to promote the identification of
compounds, we added an ultra-low dose of camptothecin as a
sensitizer in the culture media (0.1 nmol/L CPT). We confirmed
that while such a low amount of CPT did not impair the
survival of BRCA-proficient and BRCA-deficient populations,

PLK1 Inhibition Is Synthetic Lethal in BRCA1-Deficient Cells

www.aacrjournals.org Clin Cancer Res; 25(13) July 1, 2019 4051Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/clincancerres/article-pdf/25/13/4049/2053157/4049.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
it promoted SL induction at doses of olaparib that do not
induce SL as a mono drug (Supplementary Fig. S1A).
After evaluating various cell lines, we selected HCT116p21/
cells as the optimal parental cell line for this platform. Two main
factors were considered for this choice. First, this cell line proved

to be amenable for culture from high dilution factors and for
several days, reaching uniform confluence in a 96-well format.
Second, this cell line showed the strongest SL response to olaparib
when BRCA1 or BRCA2 was downregulated by lentiviral shRNA
(Fig. 1D; Supplementary Fig. S1B). Because the lack of p21

Figure 1.
Phenotypic screening platform to simultaneously search for SL interactions with BRCA1 and/or BRCA2. A, Layout of the generation of the double stable cell lines
tagged with different fluorescent proteins (CFP, iRFP, and mCherry) and expressing shRNAs for BRCA1 or BRCA2. The screening assay consists in the coculture
of these isogeneic BRCA-proficient and BRCA-deficient cell lines in equal proportions using a 96-well plate format. B, Protocol used to titrate the shRNA lentiviral
preparations. Serial dilutions of the supernatant containing the lentivirus were used to transduce HCT116p21/ cells stably expressing iRFP (the white square
highlights the puromycin dose of maximum survival from which the stable cell lines are generated). The downregulation reached for BRCA1 and BRCA2 is shown
by Western blot and qPCR, respectively. C, Timeline of the screening protocol and the three types of responses observed for the tested compounds: nontoxic
(the absolute number of cells and the ratio between the populations' percentage remains unchanged); not selective toxicity (the absolute number of cells from
each population decreases, but the ratio remains unchanged); and SL (the ratio between populations' percentage is altered, with selective toxicity in the
BRCA1- and/or BRCA2-deficient populations). D, Calibration of the screening platform with a dose–response curve of the PARPi olaparib, which was used as
positive control of SL induction in the screening plates. The gray squares highlight the optimal SL doses of olaparib, which induce the maximum survival
difference between the shBRCA and the shSCR cell lines. Data plotted as mean and SD of three independent experiments. Statistical analysis was performed
using two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni posttest (, P  0.001).

Carbajosa et al.

4052 Clin Cancer Res; 25(13) July 1, 2019 Clinical Cancer Research

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/clincancerres/article-pdf/25/13/4049/2053157/4049.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
attenuates G1/G2 checkpoints (22), these cells are prone to enter
an apoptotic program, avoiding the prolonged p21-dependent
cell-cycle arrest that could mask an SL condition in the time frame
of the experiment. For screening purposes, hits were defined by a
variation greater than 5 SDs on two survival-related values: (i) fold
of SL induction: calculated from the ratios of the different populations
within the same well and (ii) survival difference: calculated
from the differential survival when comparing a given treatment
to the untreated wells from the same plate. A detailed example
illustrating the calculation and implications of these values is
shown in Supplementary Fig. S1D.

SL screen targeting the human kinome
With the aim of discovering novel druggable pathways to treat
BRCA-deficient cancers, we screened a library of kinase inhibitors
provided by GlaxoSmithKline (PKIS2: The Public Kinase Inhibitor
Set #2). This library comprises 680 ATP-competitive inhibitors
with a broad coverage of the human kinome (23, 24). To
minimize the pleiotropic effect of ATP-competitive inhibitors
(25), we performed the screening at a low dose (0.1 mmol/L).
Strikingly, we found that 10 PLK1 inhibitors (PLKi) induced
potent SL in the BRCA1-deficient population (Fig. 2A; Supplementary
Table S1). Remarkably, one PLK1i (GSK978744A)
induced even a higher fold of SL induction and survival difference
than the optimal dose of olaparib, highlighting its high selectivity
and low unspecific toxicity at this dose (Fig. 2A). Early validation
experiments using the 10 hits plus other PLK1i available in the
PKIS2 library allowed us to rank the Top 6 PLKi by their optimal
doses of SL induction (Fig. 2B). Three of them (GSK978744A,
GSK483724A, and GSK580432A) showed an SL induction capacity
similar to the optimal dose of olaparib (Fig. 2B) and were
therefore selected for validation experiments. Noteworthy, at
higher doses of each inhibitor the SL induction range is lost due
to the increase in unspecific toxicity (Fig. 2C), as we also observed
for olaparib (Fig. 1D). Moreover, the sensitization with CPT was
not necessary for SL induction, thus demonstrating that PLK1
inhibition alone suffices to induce SL in BRCA1-deficient backgrounds
(Fig. 2D).

Validation of PLK1 inhibition as an SL trigger in BRCA1-
deficient cellular models
To discard the possibility that the SL induction could be related
to the coculture conditions of shSCR and shBRCA1 cells, we
performed SL induction experiments in which each isogenic cell
line was cultured in separate wells (Fig. 2E). As a second pharmacologic
approach we used a PLK1 inhibitor from Boehringer
Ingelheim (BI-6727: volasertib), which is currently in phase III
clinical trials (26). Using this drug in the nanomolar range, we
confirmed the results obtained using the PLK1 inhibitors from
GSK. Volasertib SL-inducing activity peaked at 6 days posttreatment
in a dose range between 5 and 10 nmol/L, where cytotoxicity
was found almost exclusively in the BRCA1-deficient population
(Fig. 2F and G).
We next validated volasertib in multiple breast cancer backgrounds.
Using lentiviral vectors expressing shRNAs for BRCA1,
we first transduced T47D cells (Fig. 2H). We also compared
nonisogenic BRCA1-KO (MDA-436) versus BRCA1-WT (MDA231)
cell lines (27) and isogenic HCC1937 BRCA1-KO versus
its complemented counterpart (Fig. 2H). We found that PLK1
inhibition was more toxic in all the BRCA1-deficient backgrounds,
in particular, in KO cells (Fig. 2H). Remarkably, SL

induction after volasertib treatment was also observed in other
type of cancer cells such as ovarian cancer cells and osteosarcoma
cells, and even in nontumoral mouse embryonic fibroblasts
expressing shRNAs for BRCA1 (Supplementary Fig. S2A).
An additional line of evidence was obtained using a genetic
approach in which instead of inhibiting PLK1, we downregulated
PLK1 expression using lentiviral shRNAs. With this method,
we also observed induction of SL in BRCA1-deficient cells
(Fig. 2I).
Importantly, most of the experiments previously described to
investigate the SL interaction between BRCA1 and PLK1 were
also performed using isogenic BRCA2-deficient backgrounds
(Supplementary Fig. S2B–S2F). From these experiments we
concluded that while PLK1 inhibition triggers mild SL in
BRCA2-deficient cells, this effect is much more robust in
BRCA1-deficient cells. Using the direct repeats assays (DR-GFP)
from Maria Jasin's Lab, we concluded that the knockdown of
BRCA1 and BRCA2 led to the impairment of HR (Supplementary
Fig. S2G), which is in line with their similar SL response to
olaparib (Fig. 1D). Moreover, we also observed that volasertib
treatment within the dose range that triggers SL does not impair
HR efficiency (Supplementary Fig. S2H). Taken together, these
data suggest that the HR impairment induced by the downregulation
of BRCA1 and BRCA2 is not the SL trigger associated
to PLK1 inhibition, but more likely an independent function of
BRCA1. Therefore, we focused the following experiments in
BRCA1-deficient models.

BRCA1 downregulation leads to aberrant transition through
M-phase after PLK1 inhibition
Because of its central role in regulating several factors that
promote mitotic progression, PLK1 inhibition causes a robust
arrest in M-phase (28). Thus, we decided to evaluate whether
the observed SL was associated to alterations in the robustness
of the M-phase arrest in BRCA1-proficient versus BRCA1-
deficient cells. We hypothesized that PLK1 inhibition could
trigger a stronger G2–M arrest in BRCA1-deficient cells, which
could, in turn, trigger SL. However, our results revealed a
different scenario. Cell-cycle analysis by flow cytometry at 6
days posttreatment showed that the accumulation of BRCA1-
deficient cells in G2–M was similar, or even attenuated, within
the dose range of volasertib that triggers SL induction (Fig. 3A;
Supplementary Fig. S3A). However, the slow recovery of BRCAdeficient
cells from the G2–M arrest correlated with a concomitant
increase in the sub-G1 population (Fig. 3A; Supplementary
Fig. S3A) and with the induction of apoptosis/necrosis,
which was evaluated using Annexin V/propidium iodide (PI)
staining (Fig. 3B). Given that both shSCR and shBRCA1 cells
grow at equivalent rates (Fig. 1C), these results suggest that the
deficiency in BRCA1 expression generates a disadvantage to
transition across M-phase in the context of PLK inhibition.
Interestingly, experiments using the well-characterized mitotic
poisons nocodazole and colcemide showed that these drugs
also induced SL in BRCA1-deficient cells (Fig. 3C), hence
reinforcing the notion that BRCA1-depleted cells display an
impaired ability to recover from M-phase arrest. However, these
drugs induced a much weaker SL response in comparison with
the one triggered by PLK1 inhibitors. Thus, we concluded that
the SL induction triggered by PLK1 inhibition could not be
attributed simply to the strength of the G2–M-phase arrest, but
more likely to an altered G2–M transition.

PLK1 Inhibition Is Synthetic Lethal in BRCA1-Deficient Cells

www.aacrjournals.org Clin Cancer Res; 25(13) July 1, 2019 4053Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/clincancerres/article-pdf/25/13/4049/2053157/4049.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
Carbajosa et al.

4054 Clin Cancer Res; 25(13) July 1, 2019 Clinical Cancer Research

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/clincancerres/article-pdf/25/13/4049/2053157/4049.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
To evaluate which mitotic progression features could be differentially
altered in BRCA1-deficient cells, we investigated previous
reported roles for BRCA1 in mitotic progression. We found
several reports indicating that BRCA1 is involved in centrosomal
duplication (29–37). Because PLK1 has complementary roles in
this process (38), we decided to evaluate the centrosomal number
and distribution in PLK1-inhibited cells. Strikingly, we found that
PLK1 inhibition leads to the accumulation of giant multinucleated
cells with large aggregates of centrosomes that systematically
locate in the cellular center (Fig. 3D; Supplementary Fig. S3B).
These results indicate that PLK1 inhibition causes aberrant mitosis,
promoting the finalization of karyokinesis without the completion
of cytokinesis.
A hypothesis that derived from the additive contribution
observed between BRCA1 knockdown and PLK1 inhibition in
mitotic progression was that the surviving multinucleated cells
should present a low remnant proliferative capacity. Thus, we
performed clonogenic experiments by replating the cells that
survive to 6 days of treatment with volasertib or olaparib
(Fig. 3E). As expected, we observed that BRCA1-deficient cells
treated with volasertib displayed a lower clonogenic potential
than BRCA1-proficient cells, a similar result to that observed for
olaparib (Fig. 3E).

SL induction by PLK1 inhibition is not associated with acute
replication stress and genomic instability
Our previous results suggested that PLK1 could be positioned
as an alternative to PARP inhibition to selectively target
BRCA1-deficient cells. Thus, we decided to evaluate whether
PLK1 inhibition also increases genomic instability of BRCA1-
deficient cells, as it is well known for PARPi (39, 40). Initially,
we evaluated two widely used markers of DNA damage, namely
gH2AX and 53BP1 foci formation. As a positive control, we
used olaparib. Surprisingly, volasertib did not induce foci
formation even at the higher doses where it triggers SL induction
(Fig. 4A; Supplementary Fig. S4). Thus, we thought that
volasertib might not activate an acute DNA damage response
but could induce lower levels of DNA damage, which require a
more sensitive readout. Therefore, we decided to perform
cytogenetic analyses to search for chromosomal aberrations
associated with the generation of single- and double-strand
breaks, namely chromosomal gaps/breaks and exchanges. We
observed that while olaparib treatment substantially increased
the number of breaks and exchanges/metaphase, volasertib did

not increase the basal proportion of any type of chromosomic
aberrations (Fig. 4B). A similar result was obtained using a
micronuclei assay, where the number of micronuclei increased
after olaparib treatment, but not after volasertib (Fig. 4C).
Together, these results indicate that the mechanism of SL
induction triggered by PLK1 inhibition is different to the one
of olaparib, which might position volasertib as a therapeutic
alternative to target BRCA-deficient cancers.

PLK1 triggers SL in a model of BRCA1þ/BRCA1 chimeric
spheroids
To investigate deeper into the therapeutic potential of PLK1
inhibition in BRCA-deficient cancers, we developed a three
dimensional (3D) cell culture model. We generated chimeric
spheroids by mixing equal amounts of BRCA1-proficient and
-deficient cells tagged with fluorescent proteins. Established
spheroids were treated with volasertib for 6 days and then
mechanically disaggregated and analyzed by flow cytometry
(Fig. 5A), using the same survival parameters selected for the
screening pipeline (Supplementary Fig. S1D). Unexpectedly, a
marked increase in the proportion of BRCA1-deficient cells was
observed in the untreated spheroids, thus suggesting that
BRCA1 deficiency provides a proliferative advantage in this
type of 3D models (Supplementary Fig. S5A). Nonetheless, the
analysis of the relative survival allowed us to conclude that the
treatment with olaparib and volasertib induces a comparable
SL response in BRCA1-deficient cells (Fig. 5B). Olaparib-treated
spheroids were similar in size than spheroids treated with
high doses of volasertib, but the latter were less compact and
more prone for disruption of the outer layers (Fig. 5C; Supplementary
Fig. S5C). We also observed that spheroids were
much more resistant to higher doses of volasertib than cell
monolayers, depicting a clear dose–response behavior when
analyzing the internal percentages of both cell populations in
each pool of spheroids as independent experimental units
(Supplementary Fig. S5B).

Development of an animal model to study SL induction
in vivo
The data obtained using in vitro models prompted us to investigate
whether the SL induction also takes place in vivo. The
complexity to address this issue relies on the fact that PLK1
inhibition per se has an antitumoral effect (13), showing strong
cytotoxic activity independently of the BRCA1 status (see higher

Figure 2.
PLK1 inhibition is SL with BRCA1 deficiency. A, Screening results with the PKIS2 library from GlaxoSmithKline. The graph shows the fold of SL
induction and the survival difference after the treatment with 680 kinase inhibitors in the BRCA1-deficient population. Olaparib 100 nmol/L was used as positive
control in each screening plate. Ten PLK1 inhibitors were identified as hits using the criteria of more than 5 SDs in any of the variables. The most potent PLK1
inhibitor, GSK978744A, is highlighted within a red square. Z prime analysis was performed as Z¼ 1–3(sp þ sn)/|mp – mn|, where "p" is olaparib survival
difference and "n" is the survival difference of the nontreated samples. B, Early dose–response validation with all the PLK1 inhibitors available in the library. The
table shows the top 6 inhibitors and the optimal dose at which they induce the highest survival difference (Surv Diff) between isogenic BRCA1-proficient and
BRCA1-deficient cells. Olaparib is depicted for comparative purposes. C, Full dose–response experiments with the top 3 PLK1 inhibitors in HCT116p21/ cells,
showing the survival of the isogenic shBRCA and shSCR cell lines. D, SL induction with GSK978744A in BRCA1-deficient cells with or without the addition of 0.1
nmol/L CPT as a sensitizer. E, SL induction with GSK978744A using shSCR and shBRCA1 cells in coculture, as in the screening assay, or as monoculture in parallel
wells. F, Dose response SL induction with a commercial PLK1 inhibitor, volasertib (BI-6727), in coculture of HCT116p21/. G, Dose response using volasertib in a
time course monoculture experiment from 3 to 6 day endpoints, showing the survival difference between shBRCA1 and shSCR cells. H, Validation of the SL
response to volasertib using three pairs of breast cancer cell lines in monoculture experiments: T47DshSCR versus T47DshBRCA1, MDA-231BRCA1-WT versus MDA436BRCA1-KO,
and HCC1937BRCA1-KO versus HCC1937BRCA1-C. I, Protocol of shRNA-mediated knockdown of PLK1 in HCT116p21/ cells. The Western blot (WB) on
the central panel shows equivalent levels of PLK1 knockdown reached in shSCR and shBRCA1 cells. Bottom, decreased survival observed in BRCA-deficient
cells after the downregulation of PLK1. Survival was calculated by the total cell count in each well after PLK1 knockdown for 72 hours. Statistical analysis was
performed using two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni posttest (, P  0.001;  , P  0.01).

PLK1 Inhibition Is Synthetic Lethal in BRCA1-Deficient Cells

www.aacrjournals.org Clin Cancer Res; 25(13) July 1, 2019 4055Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/clincancerres/article-pdf/25/13/4049/2053157/4049.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
Carbajosa et al.

4056 Clin Cancer Res; 25(13) July 1, 2019 Clinical Cancer Research

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/clincancerres/article-pdf/25/13/4049/2053157/4049.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
Figure 4.
Volasertib does not induce DNA
damage or chromosomic
aberrations at SL doses. A,
HCT116p21/ shSCR and shBRCA1
cells were treated with volasertib or
olaparib. Forty-eight hours later,
immunostaining with 53BP1 and
gH2AX antibodies was performed.
The percentage of cells with foci for
these two DNA damage markers
was quantified using fluorescence
microscopy (magnification: 100).
Only nuclei with more than 5 foci of
53BP1 were quantified as positive.
Cells with more than 35 gH2AX focal
structures were considered positive.
At least 300 cells per condition were
analyzed. Statistical analysis was
performed using two-way ANOVA
with Bonferroni posttest (, P
0.001). B, HCT116p21/ BRCA1-
proficient and -deficient cells were
submitted for cytogenetic analysis
48 hours after the treatment with
volasertib or olaparib. The frequency
of gaps, breaks, and exchanges was
calculated after analyzing a
minimum of 70 metaphases per
condition. C, HCT116p21/ BRCA1-
proficient and -deficient cells were
treated for 24 hours using volasertib
or olaparib and were arrested at a
binucleated stage using cytochalasin
B. The frequency of micronuclei was
estimated using DAPI staining and
fluorescence microscopy
(magnification: 100), analyzing a
minimum of 300 binucleated cells
per condition. Two-tailed unpaired
t test was used (, P  0.001;  : P  0.01).

Figure 3.
The combination of PLK1 inhibition and BRCA1 deficiency triggers aberrant mitotic transition and leads to decreased clonogenic potential. A, DNA content
profiles using propidium iodide (PI) to compare the cell-cycle progression of HCT116p21/ shSCR and shBRCA1 cells treated with volasertib. B, Quantification of
apoptosis/necrosis induction of HCT116p21/ shSCR and shBRCA1 cells stained with Annexin V-FITC and PI after treatment with the optimal SL dose of volasertib
(7.5 nmol/L). C, Dose–response experiment that shows the SL induction triggered by the mitotic poisons nocodazole and colcemide in BRCA1-deficient cells.
Left, control of the M-phase arrest triggered by 10 ng/mL nocodazole. Statistical analysis was performed using two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni posttest
(, P  0.001). D, shSCR and shBRCA1 HCT116p21/ cells were treated with DMSO or volasertib. Six days later, immunofluorescences were performed using
g-tubulin (red) to stain the centrosomes, phalloidin (green) to delimitate the cytoplasm, and DAPI to stain the nuclei. Images were taken with an inverted
fluorescence microscope (magnification: 60). Right, the quantification of cells with more than 3 nuclei (or two nuclei with a single centrosome) for each
condition is shown at both 5 and 7.5 nmol/L of volasertib. At least 1,000 cells per condition were analyzed. Statistical analysis was performed using two-way
ANOVA with Bonferroni posttest (, P  0.001). E, Left, summary of the protocol used to evaluate the clonogenic potential of the surviving population to
volasertib treatment in HCT116p21/ shSCR and shBRCA1 cells. An example of 1 plate for each condition stained with crystal violet is depicted. Right, the
quantification of the surviving fraction of three independent experiments. Two-tailed unpaired t test (, P  0.001; , P  0.05).

PLK1 Inhibition Is Synthetic Lethal in BRCA1-Deficient Cells

www.aacrjournals.org Clin Cancer Res; 25(13) July 1, 2019 4057Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/clincancerres/article-pdf/25/13/4049/2053157/4049.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
Carbajosa et al.

4058 Clin Cancer Res; 25(13) July 1, 2019 Clinical Cancer Research

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/clincancerres/article-pdf/25/13/4049/2053157/4049.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
doses of PLK1i in Fig. 2C, F, and H). Given that our goal was to
demonstrate in vivo that BRCA1 deficiency increases the cellular
sensitivity to PLK1 inhibition and triggers SL, we developed an
animal model to evaluate such differential sensitivity. Although a
possibility would be to compare the sensitivity to PLK1
inhibition using isogenic cell lines in different mice, we
hypothesized that the maximum comparability would be
reached using single mice as experimental units. Thus, we
established a xenograft model where two different types of
isogenic cells (BRCA-proficient and BRCA-deficient) were
injected to each flank of the same mouse (Fig. 5D). As such,
each mouse bears two parallel tumors that only differ in their
BRCA1 expression status. This protocol has the advantage that
allows the analysis of classical tumor size at given endpoints,
but also to estimate the growth curve of each tumor in comparison
with the flanking tumor in the same mouse (Fig. 5D,
right). We selected an experimental setup where volasertib was
administered orally once a week (Supplementary Fig. S5D). We
observed that in animals treated with vehicle both BRCA1-
proficient and BRCA1-deficient tumors grew at similar rates
during the entire length of the experiment (Fig. 5E and F). As
reported, volasertib treatment at 50 mg/kg abolished tumor
growth of HCT116 cells (shSCR in our experiment) and kept
tumors similar to their initial size until the end of the experiment
(Fig. 5F; Supplementary Fig. S5E; ref. 41). Strikingly
however, BRCA1-deficient tumors were much strongly affected
by volasertib, not only inhibiting their growth, but also showing
remission to the point of becoming unmeasurable after 3
weeks of treatment (Fig. 5E and F). From a therapeutic point of
view, this was an exciting finding because it proved that BRCA1
deficiency alone is enough to trigger increased sensibility to
volasertib in vivo. Indeed, when we determined the ratio of
tumor growth within each mouse, we observed that animals
treated with vehicle always presented a ratio near to 1, indicating
similar proliferation rates of BRCA1-proficient and
BRCA1-deficient tumors. However, animals treated with the
optimal reported dose of volasertib (50 mg/kg) presented a
ratio of 0.5 at day 11 and 0.25 at the end of the experiment,
thus underlining the differential response to the treatment
triggered by BRCA1 deficiency (Fig. 5G). Remarkably, we
also revealed that decreasing to half the dose of volasertib
(25 mg/kg) suffices to induce strong SL in those mice
(Fig. 5G; Supplementary Fig. S5F). These findings prompt us
to explore a BRCA1-mutant breast cancer mouse model, which
more closely resembles the features of the human disease

(Supplementary Fig. S5G). We found that, like HCT116shBRCA1
cells, MDA-436BRCA1-KO cells show high sensitivity to volasertib
in vivo (Fig. 5H; Supplementary Fig. S5G).

High PLK1 expression is observed in low-expressing BRCA1
cells and in patients with triple-negative breast cancer
To study the therapeutic potential of inhibiting PLK1 in
BRCA1-deficient patients, we performed a retrospective analysis
using The Cancer Genome Atlas database (TCGA; refs. 42–44).
Our initial approach was to assess a potential mutual exclusion
of BRCA1 and PLK1 tumor mutations in human breast cancers,
which would suggest the existence of an SL interaction between
these mutations in patients. Although a tendency to coexclusion
was observed (Supplementary Fig. S6A), PLK1 mutants
were extremely rare (0.2%) and therefore we could only analyze
very small patient cohorts. Thus, we decided to study BRCA1
and PLK1 mRNA expression patterns. We observed that while
PLK1 and BRCA1 correlate in their expression levels, patients
with very low levels of BRCA1 expression were characterized by
high levels of PLK1 expression (Fig. 6A, dotted trapezoid).
Remarkably, deeper genomic analysis revealed that approximately
75% of low-BRCA1/high-PLK1 patients were basal-like
according to the PAM50 subtypes (Fig. 6B) and triple negative
for hormone receptors (Supplementary Fig. S6B), in comparison
with approximately 18% of each subtype when the complete
breast cancer cohort (Supplementary Fig. S6C). To further
explore the biological relevance of the high-PLK1 expression
observed in patients with low-BRCA1 expression, we went back
to the isogenic pairs of cell lines used in the screening and
during the validation phase. Our goal was to establish whether
the knockdown of BRCA1 alone suffices to trigger an increase in
PLK1 expression, and whether the rescue of BRCA1 expression
in BRCA1-KO cells is able to revert the overexpression phenotype.
Both scenarios were confirmed. Every isogenic cell pair
submitted to shRNABRCA1 expression depicted a stable increase
in PLK1 levels (Fig. 6C; Supplementary Fig. S6D). A more
exacerbated phenotype was observed in the isogenic breast
cancer cell pair HCC1937, in which the rescue of BRCA1
expression dramatically reduced PLK1 expression levels
(Fig. 6C). Moreover, when we studied markers of PLK1 catalytic
activity in these cells, we found that high PLK1 levels correlate
with increased pPLK1 and its downstream target pCDK1
(Fig. 6D), thus indicating that these cancer cells present higher
levels of PLK1 kinase activity.

Figure 5.
Volasertib triggers selective toxicity in chimeric spheroids and in a two xenograft in vivo models. A, Protocol used to generate chimeric spheroids. HCT116p21/
CFP-shSCR and iRFP-shBRCA1 cells were seeded in equal numbers using a 96-well plate with hanging drop technology. Three days later, the assembly of
chimeric spheroids was confirmed by microscopy and treatment with volasertib was performed for 6 days. Pools of 10 spheroids per condition were mechanically
disaggregated with trypsin and analyzed by flow cytometry. B, Dose–response experiment with chimeric spheroids treated with volasertib or olaparib as a
positive control. The relative survival of the BRCA1-proficient and -deficient populations calculated in relation to the same populations in the control spheroids
is shown. C, Representative images of one spheroid per condition before the spheroids' processing by flow cytometry. D, Double tumor xenograft model: Human
HCT116p21/ CFP-shSCR or iRFP-shBRCA1 cells were injected in contralateral flanks of individual mice. Once the tumors reached a size of approximately 50 mm3
,
volasertib or vehicle was administered orally using a gavage needle. Normalized tumor growth and the normalized ratio are calculated for each animal at
different time points. E, Representative animals for the control, 25 mg/kg of volasertib, and 50 mg/kg of volasertib groups at the end of the double tumor
xenograft experiment. Bottom, the extracted tumors that were also imaged with an infrared scanner to confirm that even the smallest tumors contained the
original cells. F, Measurements of the tumor volume for the control and 50 mg/kg double tumor groups. Dotted line indicates volasertib administration days.
Data represent the mean tumor volume  SEM (n ¼ 5). G, Normalized tumor ratio across different time points of the double tumor experiment. Statistical
analysis was performed using two-way ANOVA with Bonferroni posttest (n ¼ 5;  , P  0.01; , P < 0.001). H, Orthotopic xenograft model: Human breast cancer
MDA-MD-436BRCA1-KO cells were injected in mammary fat pad of nude mice. Measurements of tumor volumes for the control and 45 mg/kg volasertib–treated
groups are shown. The dotted line indicates volasertib administration days. Data represent the mean tumor volume  SEM (n ¼ 13).

PLK1 Inhibition Is Synthetic Lethal in BRCA1-Deficient Cells

www.aacrjournals.org Clin Cancer Res; 25(13) July 1, 2019 4059Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/clincancerres/article-pdf/25/13/4049/2053157/4049.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
Discussion
An unforeseen SL interaction between PLK1 and BRCA1
Previous reports have explored functional links between PLK1
and BRCA1. Evidence is available in both directions. On the one
hand, PLK1 and BRCA1 have been shown to physically interact in
cells, being BRCA1 a modulator of PLK1 kinase activity in
response to replication stress (45). On the other hand, PLK1
phosphorylates BRCA1 at serine 1164, modulating its doublestrand
break repair functions (46). Although our results could be,
in part, explained by such roles of PLK1 and BRCA1 within the
same pathways, the fact that we observe strong SL induction both
in BRCA1-deficient and BRCA1-KO models (Fig. 2) suggests that
the SL trigger should be associated with compensatory BRCA1 and
PLK1 roles that may not be circumscribed to the ones mentioned
above. Moreover, our results with BRCA2-deficient cells and with
the direct repeats assay (Supplementary Fig. S2) indicate that the
observed SL is unlikely linked to the HR deficiency of these cells.
Our hypothesis of compensatory pathways is strongly supported
by the finding that patients with very low expression levels of
BRCA1 display high levels of PLK1 expression (Fig. 6A). In line
with this, it was striking to find out that the artificial knockdown of
BRCA1 using shRNA sufficed to trigger a stable increase in PLK1
protein levels in the cell lines generated for this study (Fig. 6C;
Supplementary Fig. S6D). These results suggest the existence of a
universal compensatory response to BRCA1 downregulation and
that the SL induction observed in our experiments is linked to an
acquired dependence/addiction to PLK1 in BRCA1-deficient cells.
But, which might be such a compensatory function of PLK1 and
BRCA1? Our data support the notion that the SL phenotype is
timely linked to the progression through mitosis. On the one
hand, PLK1 has a pivotal contribution to mitosis progression,
participating in the mitotic entry, centrosome maturation and
duplication cycle, and cytokinesis (28). On the other hand, critical

functions for BRCA1 in the progression through mitosis have
also been extensively characterized (47, 48). In particular, it has
been consistently demonstrated that BRCA1 plays an important
role in centrosome duplication, interacting with and promoting
the ubiquitination of centrosomal g-tubulin (29–37). Our
studies of centrosomal number and localization led to the
identification of giant multinucleated cells with large aggregates
of centrosomes (Fig. 3D). Interestingly, we observed that
BRCA1-induced deficiency and PLK1 inhibition as single treatments
lead to the increase of these aberrant phenotypes above
the basal levels. Moreover, the combination of PLK1 inhibition
in the dose range that triggers SL induction induces a marked
accumulation of these phenotypes in a BRCA1-deficient background
(Fig. 3D). Our hypothesis is that such giant multinucleated
cells are the consequence of a survival phenotype rather
than being a prerequisite for cell death. In fact, SL induction
starts to clearly manifest at day 4 (Fig. 2G), while the giant cells
are mainly observed at longer end points (Supplementary Fig.
S3). Nonetheless, we speculate that these cells are destined to
die, presumably by mitotic catastrophe or by cytokinesis failure
(49). This assumption is supported by the extremely low
clonogenic potential depicted by the surviving population
(Fig. 3E). Together, our findings establish a strong synthetic
essential link between PLK1 and BRCA1 that unveils a great
therapeutic potential of inhibiting PLK1 in this type of
malignancies.

A new niche for the therapeutic inhibition of PLK1 in human
cancers
A great deal of effort and resources were invested during the
past 15 years to move PLK1 inhibitors to the clinic. The FDA has
granted the "breakthrough therapy" status to Boehringer's
volasertib and the "Orphan Drug" designation to Trovagene's

Figure 6.
PLK1 and BRCA1 levels in patients
with breast cancer from TCGA and
in the isogenic cell lines used in this
study. A, TCGA analysis showing
that tumor samples with low-BRCA1
mRNA expression present highmRNA
expression levels of PLK1
(dotted trapezoid). The complete
TCGA provisional database was
used for this analysis (n ¼ 1,093
patients). B, A subset of the TCGA
database that included information
about the PAM50 type of tumors
(n ¼ 521) was analyzed, and the
PAM50 subtypes—basal like, normal
like, luminal A, luminal B, and HER2
enriched—were plotted. C, Western
blot of PLK1 protein levels in
isogenic HCT116p21/ shSCR versus
shBRCA1, and BRCA1C versus
HCC1937BRCA1-KO cells. D, Western
blot showing phospho-PLK1 and
phospho-CDK1 levels as markers of
catalytic activity of PLK1 in
HCC1937BRCA1-C versus
HCC1937BRCA1-KO cells. Statistical
analysis: two-tailed unpaired t test
(, P  0.05;  , P  0.01).

Carbajosa et al.

4060 Clin Cancer Res; 25(13) July 1, 2019 Clinical Cancer Research

Downloaded from http://aacrjournals.org/clincancerres/article-pdf/25/13/4049/2053157/4049.pdf by guest on 14 August 2024
PCM-075 for the treatment of acute myeloid leukemia. Given
to its central role in mitotic coordination, PLK1 inhibition
imposes a strong antitumoral effect in many types of cancers,
which is highlighted by the numerous ongoing clinical trials.
However, the housekeeping roles of PLK1 also implicate undesired
adverse effects, which seem to be more extreme in the
cardiovascular system (50, 51). Thus, cancers characterized by
PLK1 overexpression (13), are likely to respond better to PLK1
inhibitors, triggering attenuated collateral effects. The findings
presented in this article unveil a new promising niche to exploit
the potential of PLK1 inhibitors. Our unbiased screening
approach revealed a dose range where PLK1 inhibitors display
almost no cytotoxic effect in BRCA1þ cells yet inducing strong
SL in BRCA1-deficient cells (Fig. 2). Remarkably, we have also
developed chimeric spheroids and an animal model that
allowed us to confirm such a differential response to PLK1
inhibition in an in vitro 3D context and in vivo (Fig. 5). In our SL
animal model, BRCA1-deficient tumors reached almost complete
remission after only 3 weeks of treatment with oral
volasertib, while tumor size remained unchanged in the BRCAþ
tumors of the same animals (Fig. 5E and F). These thrilling
findings point toward the design of clinical trials that consider
BRCA1 status as a prognostic maker of therapeutic response to
PLK1 inhibitors. Moreover, our retrospective analysis of the
TCGA database shows that patients with triple-negative breast
cancer (TNBC) present higher expression of PLK1 that nonTNBC
(Supplementary Fig. S6B). This finding implies that this
type of breast cancers, which are characterized by their limited
therapeutic options, could benefit with therapeutic schemes
involving PLK1 inhibition, regardless of their BRCA1 status. In
addition, our results also position PLK1 as an alternative to
PARPi to target BRCA1-deficient cancers. Our evidence indicates
that olaparib and volasertib have different mechanisms of
action (Figs. 1–4), therefore suggesting that PLK1 inhibitors
could become a therapeutic alternative to treat BRCA1-deficient
cancers that become resistant to PARPi. In line with this, a
recent report proposed the combinatorial use of olaparib and
PLK1 inhibitors to treat olaparib-resistant prostate cancer,
independently of the BRCA1 status (52). Moreover, the absence
of genomic instability induction by volasertib at the SL dose
(Fig. 4) suggests that this type of treatment would induce a
"clean" type of antitumoral response, attenuating the induction

of genomic stability and delaying the acquisition of resistance
mechanisms.

Disclosure of Potential Conflicts of Interest
No potential conflicts of interest were disclosed.

Authors' Contributions
Conception and design: S. Carbajosa, K.P. Madauss, V. Gottifredi, G. Soria
Development of methodology: S. Carbajosa, M.F. Pansa, N.S. Paviolo,
A.M. Castellaro, A.D. Nigra, I.A. García, L. Rodriguez-Berdini, G.A. Gil,
V. Gottifredi, G. Soria
Acquisition of data (provided animals, acquired and managed patients,
provided facilities, etc.): S. Carbajosa, A.M. Castellaro, B.L. Caputto,
G.A. Gil, J.L. Bocco, V. Gottifredi, G. Soria
Analysis and interpretation of data (e.g., statistical analysis, biostatistics,
computational analysis): S. Carbajosa, M.F. Pansa, N.S. Paviolo,
A.M. Castellaro, D.L. Andino, A.D. Nigra, A.C. Racca, V. Angiolini,
L. Guantay, F. Villafanez, M.B. Federico, M.C. Rodríguez-Baili, K.P. Madauss, ~
I. Gloger, E. Fernandez
Writing, review, and/or revision of the manuscript: S. Carbajosa, M.F. Pansa,
A.M. Castellaro, A.D. Nigra, A.C. Racca, I. Gloger, E. Fernandez, V. Gottifredi
Administrative, technical, or material support (i.e., reporting or organizing
data, constructing databases): S. Carbajosa, V. Angiolini, I. Gloger
Study supervision: S. Carbajosa, B.L. Caputto, G. Drewes, I. Gloger,
E. Fernandez, G.A. Gil, J.L. Bocco, V. Gottifredi, G. Soria
Others (project coordination and administration): G. Soria

