Periosteal Osteosarcoma

R. BRUCE HALL, MD,'.t LEONARD H. ROBINSON, DMD, MD$§
MARTIN M. MALAWAR, MD.((T AND WILLIAM K. DUNHAM. MD*.#

An analysis of 6 patients with periosteal osteosarcoma treated by the authors along with a review of
55 patients reported in the literature demonstrates that periosteal osteosarcoma is distinctly different
from conventional osteosarcoma or periosteal chondrosarcoma. Periosteal osteosarcoma is a less
aggressive tumor than conventional osteosarcoma. It is a relatively well-differentiated chondroblastic
osteosarcoma occurring on the surface of the long bones of the extremities. Three patients demonstrated
frank medullary invasion of tumor, two grossly and one microsurgically. Patients treated with marginal
resection had a 70% local recurrence rate. Patients receiving wide resection or primary amputation
have survived longer with less recurrence of disease. Overall, 10 of 61 patients are dead with metastatic
disease with a mean reported follow-up of 6 years and 7 months. Adjunctive therapy has been of no
demonstrable aid in terms of prolonging survival. Medullary extension of this tumor should not be
used to exclude this diagnosis. The authors believe that the treatment of choice is wide resection
without adjunctive chemotherapy.
Cuncer 55:165-171, 1985.

ERIOSTEAL OSTEOSARCOMA was described by Lich- P tenstein in 1959' as the periosteal counterpart of
central or intramedullary osteosarcoma. Periosteal osteosarcoma
was described as a distinct clinicopathologic
entity by Unni and colleagues' in 1976 and has been
supported by other author^^.^ as being distinctly different
from conventional osteogenic sarcoma. Although in the
description of periosteal osteosarcoma offered by Unni
and co-workers, intramedullary involvement is used as
a means to exclude the diagnosis, we suggest that an
area of medullary tumor extention should not be used
to exclude the diagnosis of periosteal osteosarcoma. The
radiographic, histologic, and biologic nature of this
tumor is distinct enough to allow the diagnosis in the
face of medullary extention. The recognition of this
tumor allows the treating physician to spare these patients
the radical and dangerous treatment that is warranted
for conventional osteosarcoma. Sixty-one patients with
periosteal osteosarcoma, including six treated by the

From the *Department of Surgery, tDivision of Orthopaedic Surgery/
#Orthopaedic Oncology. and the §Department of Pathology, The
University of Alabama in Birmingham. Birmingham, Alabama, and
[[The Children's Hospital National Medical Center. Washington,
D. C.
$ Professor of Pathology.
7 Assistant Professor.
Address for reprints: William K. Dunham, MD, Associate Professor,
Department of Surgery, Division of Orthopaedic Surgery/Orthopaedic
Oncology. The University of Alabama in Birmingham, Birmingham.
AL 35233.
Accepted for publication December 9, 1983.

authors, have been reviewed and are reported in this
article.

Case Reports

Case 1

A 16-year-old black girl presented with a 2-month history
of vague, aching pains over her right medial proximal tibia
with findings of a firm, indurated mass at this site. Roentgenograms
demonstrated an exophytic lesion, 7 X 1 cm, with
calcific density, zones of lucency, and moderate reactive margination
(Fig. I). A bone scan revealed only increased uptake
in the proximal tibia; there was no evidence of metastases. An
incisional biopsy of the right medial and proximal tibia was
performed, and a glistening white tumor was found with soft
tissue extension along the medial collateral ligament. On
frozen section microscopy, malignant cartilaginous tissue was
seen; the wound was then closed. A diagnosis of periosteal
osteosarcoma was made by permanent section studies (Figs.
2-4). Ten days later an above-knee amputation was done.
Microscopic study of the specimen revealed a small focus of
intramedullary extension of the tumor. The patient received
multidrug adjuvant chemotherapy consisting of 15 g of methotrexate
each week for 8 weeks, then switched to 3 weeks.
Vincristine, 2 mg, was given 2 hours before methotrexate
administration. Chemotherapy was continued for I year. The
patient has been followed for 60 months without evidence of
recurrence of disease.

Cuse 2

A 40-year-old black man presented with swelling along his
right proximal tibia that had been present for 2 months and a

165
166 CANCER January 1 1985 VOl. 55

no soft tissue involvement. A chest roentgenogram was within
normal limits. An incisional biopsy was done in March 1980
and revealed a predominantly chondroblastic osteoid-producing
tumor. The diagnosis of periosteal osteosarcoma was made at
the Armed Forces Institute of Pathology. A wide resection was
performed in May 1980. There was no medullary involvement
by the tumor. He did not require a definitive reconstructive
procedure. The patient returned in January 1981 with complaints
of pain in his surgical site with associated redness and
swelling. Repeat chest roentgenogram was normal, and a bone
scan revealed slightly increased uptake in the affected area. An
incisional biopsy was then performed and demonstrated no
local recurrence. At 24 months follow-up, he has no evidence
of local or metastatic recurrence.

Case 4

A IS-year-old white girl was referred with a 3-week history
of painful cramping and swelling of her left leg. Physical
examination revealed a firm mass along the left proximal
fibula. Roentgenogram revealed an exophytic mass, 8 X 3.5
cm, with flocculent calcific densities peripherally and calcific
densities and zones of lucency centrally (Fig. 6A). A CT scan

FIG. I. Preoperative roentgenogram of Case I. This lesion of the
right proximal tibia has its center on the periosteal surface. It has an
illdefined, partially mineralized soft tissue mass.

palpable, immobile, nontender mass 4.5 X 7 cm in size was
noted. Roentgenograms revealed an exophytic proximal right
tibia1 lesion 7 X 3 cm, of calcific density with zones of lucency,
without radiographic evidence of medullary involvement (Fig.
5A). A computerized tomography (CT) scan of the tibia
demonstrated no marrow involvement, and a chest roentgenogram
was within normal limits. A bone scan showed increased
uptake at this site. An incisional biopsy was performed on
October 24, 1979 with frozen section findings of malignant
osteoid-producing tumor. A wide resection was then performed,
followed by arthrodesis of the knee over a custom Sampson
rod with autogenous bone graft. The gross specimen demonstrated
cortical invasion and medullary extension of the tumor
(Fig. SB). The patient did not receive adjuvant chemotherapy.
At 39 months follow-up, he is without evidence of local or
metastatic recurrence (Fig. 5C).

Case 3

A 21-year-old black man presented with a history of pain
in his left distal anterolateral femur. Roentgenograms of this
area revealed a sessile cortical lesion, 5.5 X I cm, of calcitic
FIG. 2. Photomicrograph of a periosteal osteosarcoma showing a
lobule of malignant cartilage at the top and a spicule of tumor bone
with adiacent tumor osteoid below (H & E, oriejnal - magnification
density with zones of lucency, no reactive margination, and ~120).

 10970142, 1985, 1, Downloaded from https://acsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/1097-0142(19850101)55:1<165::AID-CNCR2820550126>3.0.CO;2-A, Wiley Online Library on [14/08/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
No. I PERIOSTEAL OSTEOSARCOMA - /fall et a/. 167

of the left fibula revealed a soft tissue mass around the bone,
extending along the interosseous membrane, with questionable
medullary involvement. A bone scan showed only increased
uptake in the left fibula. Her chesi roentgenogram and chest
CT scans were normal. lncisional biopsy on June 9, 1982
showed a chondroblastic, osteoid-producing malignant lesion
located outside of the cortex. On August I I, 1982 the patient
had an attemped wide resection of the left fibula. Gross cortical
invasion with medullary extension of the tumor was evident
on hemisection of the surgical specimen (Fig. 6B). Permanent
sections revealed a marginal resection with areas of high-grade
osteosarcoma. We believe that a marginal excision for a highgrade
sarcoma is at high risk for local recurrence.5 For this
reason, treatment was supplemented with 100 mg of Adriamycin
(doxorubicin) over 80 hours by continuous infusion of
the left superficial femoral artery, followed by radiation therapy
of 3000 rad in 10 fractions to the left proximal fibular
area."' After 14 months of follow-up, she is without recurrence
(Fig. 6C).

Case 5

A 28-year-old white man had pain in the lateral aspect of
his right tibia, exacerbated by activity for 2 months. When he

FIG. 4. Photomicrograph showing the typical lobule of malignant
cartilage, which is the dominant component in periosteal osteosarcoma.
Enchondral ossification. which is seen centrally. accounts for some of
the radiodensity seen on roentgenograms (H & E. original magnification
x 120).

was first seen, he was found to have a firm, nontender bony
mass along the posterior medial aspect of the proximal right
tibia. Chest roentgenogram was within normal limits. lncisional
biopsy was performed on December 4, 1978, and a diagnosis
of parosteal osteosarcoma was made. Three days later a
marginal excision was performed. A local recurrence was
found 1 I months later, and this was treated with an aboveknee
amputation. The patient was fitted with a prosthesis and
remained free of known disease for 2 years and 6 months,
until a palpable mass was found along the superior pubic rami
on the right side. A needle biopsy specimen of this mass
revealed chrondroblastic osteosarcoma. A review of all the
patient's roentgenograms and pathologic material confirmed a
diagnosis of periosteal osteosarcoma. The patient then received
100 mg of Adriamycin over an 80-hour period though his
right femoral artery, then 1750 rad of radiation to his right
groin over 10 days. A CT scan of the lungs and a chest
roentgenogram showed no metastases. A resection of the right
FIG. 3. Photomicrograph demonstrating the malignant spindle cells groin was then with findings Of thrombus
in the right femoral and iliac Veins with extension into
the inferior vena cava and soft tissue of the left side of the
producing osteoid found within the p,$n,arily cartilaginous [issue in
periosteal osteosarcoma (H & E. original magnification X480).

 10970142, 1985, 1, Downloaded from https://acsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/1097-0142(19850101)55:1<165::AID-CNCR2820550126>3.0.CO;2-A, Wiley Online Library on [14/08/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
168 CANCER January 1 1985 Vol. 55

FIGS. SA-SC. (A, left) Roentgenogram of right tibia (Case 2) shows a periosteal lesion with a more well-defined soft tissue mass. No medullary
involvement was suspected preoperatively. (B, center) Hemisected gross specimen (Case 2) demonstrates cortical and medullary bone penetration
by the tumor. Black arrow indicates the area of medullary extension. (C, right) Photograph of the patient (Case 2) shows him bearing weight on
the affected extremity 39 months after resection arthrodesis of the knee.

FIGS. 6A-6C. (A, left) Roentgenogram of left fibula (Case 4) demonstrates a periosteal lesion encircling the fibula. The flocculent calcification
is very suggestive of cartilaginous tissue. Medullary involvement was suspected from tomograms made of the lesion. (9, center) Hemisected gross
specimen (Case 4) demonstrates a discrete of focus of extension of the tumor into the medullary canal of the fibula (indicated by black arrow).
(C, right) Photograph of the patient (Case 4) shows her bearing weight on the affected extremity 14 months after en bloc resection of the fibula.
She was not given systemic chemotherapy.

 10970142, 1985, 1, Downloaded from https://acsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/1097-0142(19850101)55:1<165::AID-CNCR2820550126>3.0.CO;2-A, Wiley Online Library on [14/08/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
No. I PERIOSTEAL OSTEOSARCOMA * Hall el a/. 169

FIGS. 7A-7C. (A, left) Roentgenogram of right proximal humerus (Case 6) demonstrates saucerization of the lateral cortex and the periosteal
reaction of a Codman’s triangle. (B, center) A photomicrograph of a longitudinal section of the humerus (Case 6) shows the periosteal osteosarcoma
thinning the underlying cortex and invading the cortex (black arrow) but not the medullary bone (H & E, original magnification XI). (C, right)
Photomicrograph of the cortical bone underlying the tumor in Case 6 shows islands of sarcoma permeating dense cortical bone (H & E. original
magnification X 120).

pelvis. An inferior venacavagram was performed, demonstrating
extension of the tumor to the level of the renal veins and into
the left common iliac vein. A resection of the inferior vena
cava to a point just distal to the left renal vein and to the left
common iliac vein was performed, but grossly unresectable
tumor was left in the right hemipelvis. The patient received
450 mg/m2 of systemic Adriamycin chemotherapy. He was
followed up for 4 years and 9 months from diagnosis, until he
died of abdominal extension without evidence of pulmonary
metastases.

Case 6

A 32-year-old right-hand-dominant woman with a 5-month
history of intermittent pain in the right shoulder noticed a
mass 2 months prior to admission. Physical examination
revealed a firm, nontender soft tissue mass measuring 8 X 4
cm under the deltoid and fixed to the lateral proximal humerus.
Roentgenograms showed a 6-cm bone-forming lesion of the
lateral proximally and distally, with thinning of the underlying
cortex but no medullary involvement (Fig. 7A). Bone scan
showed marked activity increase eccentrically, corresponding
to the plain radiograph with only a slight increase in intramedullary
activity. A CT scan of the shoulder showed a boneforming
tumor rising from the lateral humeral cortex with no
evidence of penetration. The patient underwent a Craig needle
biopsy with a frozen section diagnosis of malignant chondroblastic
tumor, consistent with periosteal or juxtacortical osteosarcoma.
Permanent sections revealed chondroblastic tissue

invading underlying cortex (Figs. 7B and 7C). The patient
underwent an en bloc resection of the proximal 19 cm of the
humerus, deltoid, and adjacent soft tissue, with preservation
of the musculocutaneous and radial nerves. Intraoperatively,
the margins of resection were found to be free of reactive
tissue or tumor. Reconstruction of the defect was accomplished
by a custom designed 190-mm prosthetic humeral head fixed
with bone cement into the distal humerus. The prosthesis was
suspended by Mercelene tape through drill holes in the scapula
and clavicle. Postoperatively the patient has no active shoulder
abduction, but shoulder strength and stability are good. The
patient has no evidence of local recurrence or metastatic
disease at 16 months follow-up.

Discussion

As suggested by its name, periosteal osteosarcoma is
an osteoid-producing sarcoma apparently arising in the
periosteum of bone. Unni and co-workers described a
sarcoma of chrondroblastic nature that produced osteoid
and that was located on the cortex of long bones of the
lower extremity and had no frank medullary involvement.’
These 11 tumors were selected from more than
5,000 primary bone tumors at the Mayo Clinic. Spjut
and associates4 and Bertoni and others3 have reported
their experience with periosteal osteosarcoma.
The 61 patients now reported with periosteal osteosarcoma
range in age from 9 to 62 years, with 32 male

 10970142, 1985, 1, Downloaded from https://acsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/1097-0142(19850101)55:1<165::AID-CNCR2820550126>3.0.CO;2-A, Wiley Online Library on [14/08/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
170 CANCER January 1 1985 Vol. 55

and 29 female patients. There was no peak decade of
incidence. Twenty-eight tumors were located in the
tibia, 25 in the femur, 5 in the humerus, 3 in the fibula,
and one in the ilium (98% in the long bones of the
extremities). Symptoms were pain and swelling of the
affected extremity, usually of short duration (less than 3
months). The average tumor size was 7 X 1.7 cm.
The radiographic presentation of periosteal osteosarcoma
is suggestive of the diagnosis but not unique or
diagnostic. The lesion typically occurs on the periosteal
surface of the medial or lateral metaphyseal portion of
the long bones of the extremities. The proximal tibia is
the favored location (Figs. 1 and 5A).
The cortical bone underlying the tumor appears intact,
but it may be thickened by reaction to the lesion or
thinned by the tumor itself (Figs. 6A and 7A). The
layered periosteal reaction of a Codman’s triangle is
frequently seen at the superior or inferior limits of the
tumor (Fig. 7A).
The epicenter of the tumor itself is on the periosteal
surface of the bone. The soft tissue extent of the tumor,
although generally lucent, is of greater density than the
surrounding soft tissue and can usually be delineated.
The tumor mass has within it scattered areas of calcific
density, both the stippled calcification of areas of calcified
cartilage and the fine striations of tumor bone (Figs. I,
5A, 6A, and 7A). The sunburst appearance of radiating
spicules of mineralized tumor osteoid at right angles to
the cortical bone is frequently seen.
The microscopic appearance of the periosteal osteosarcomas
that form the basis of this report are considered
to be sufficiently characteristic to distinguish this lesion
(Figs. 2, 3, and 4). In each of the lesions studied,
cartilage constituted a prominent feature and was present
as well-defined lobules, some of which were confluent.
The cellular features were those of malignant cartilage,
usually with a low order of malignancy. Many of these
lobules showed areas of endochrondral ossification, particularly
in their central portions. The peripheral portions
of some of the lobules were rimmed by malignant
spindle cells. Scattered throughout the lesion were areas
composed of delicate, lacy seams of osteoid associated
with entrapped malignant osteoblasts.
Areas of fibroblastic differentiation with mature bone,
characteristic of parosteal osteosarcoma, were not present.
The typical intramedullary osteosarcoma is characterized
by the presence of delicate seams of osteoid associated
with cells showing the cytologic features of a
malignant neoplasm. This is not the dominant feature
in periosteal osteosarcoma.
In contrast to periosteal osteosarcoma, periosteal
chondrosarcoma is characterized by lobules of fairly
well differentiated hyaline cartilage. Myxoid areas occur
only infreq~ently.~ The cellularity noted at the periphery

of the lobules of cartilage in periosteal osteosarcoma is
not a feature in periosteal chondrosarcoma. Tumor
osteoid is not present.
Treatment of the 6 1 patients varied in spectrum from
marginal resection to amputation, with or without adjuvant
radiation and chemotherapy. Twenty-one patients
originally had marginal resection, with 15 having local
recurrences (70%). Eight of these have required amputation,
and six had more extensive local resections. Five
of 21 have died of metastatic disease from 9 months to
7 years after presentation. One of these five had received
adjuvant chemotherapy, and two of these five had
received radiation.
Twenty-five patients had amputation as their primary
procedure, with four patients later dying with metastatic
disease. Six of these 25 patients received chemotherapy,
and 2 of 25 received radiation.
Overall, 10 of 61 patients have died with metastatic
disease, with a mean reported follow-up of 6 years and
7 months.

Plea for Acceptance of Medullary Involvement

Unni and associates have stated that they accept no
medullary involvement in their classification of periosteal
osteosarcomas. Spjut and colleagues noted microscopic
medullary involvement in one case.4 We have observed
gross medullary extension of this tumor in two cases
(Cases 2 and 4), microscopic medullary extension in an
additional case (Case I), and cortical extension in another
(Case 6). Medullary extension does not seem to change
the biologic aggressiveness of the tumor or to herald a
poor prognosis.
It is accepted that the natural history of this chondroblastic
osteosarcoma arising on the surface of bone
is different from that of conventional osteosarcoma. We
speculate the less aggressive nature of this tumor might
be explained by the location of the cells of origin. These
tumors appear to arise from the undifferentiated cells of
the periosteal sheath. Sarcomatous transformation yields
primarily chondroblastic tissue distinguishable from highgrade
osteosarcoma arising on the surface of bone that
is primarily osteoblastic.8
We believe that the natural course of periosteal osteosarcoma
is for the neoplasm to grow relatively slowly
on the surface of the bone. The margin of the tumor
with surrounding tissue has a pushing nature like a
chrondrosarcoma, rather than an infiltrating margin like
a conventional osteosarcoma. The underlying cortical
bone acts as a bamer for some time as the tumor slowly
penetrates (Figs. 7B and 7C). Depending on the nature
of the individual tumor, the ability of the host bone to
respond, and the time before treatment, the periosteal
osteosarcoma may or may not penetrate the underlying

 10970142, 1985, 1, Downloaded from https://acsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/1097-0142(19850101)55:1<165::AID-CNCR2820550126>3.0.CO;2-A, Wiley Online Library on [14/08/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License
No. I PERIOSTEAL OSTEOSARCOMA - Hull ef ul. 171

medullary bone. The tumor’s pushing border makes it
easier to treat surgically, requiring removal of less normal
tissue at the periphery to remove every tumor cell. This
idea is reinforced by the 13% local recurrence rate with
wide resections reported for periosteal osteosarcomas.
The periosteal osteosarcoma metastasizes later and
less frequently than conventional osteosarcoma arising
in the rich, vascular sinusoids of the metaphyseal bone.
The cases now reported suggest a metastatic rate of 15%
to 2O%*,’ with adequate treatment (no local recurrence)
of the primary tumor. Currently, we do not recommend
adjuvant chemotherapy because of this lower metastatic
potential, the historic unresponsiveness of chondroblastic
tissue to chemotherapy, and the state of the art in
adjuvant chemotherapy for conventional osteosarcoma.
We are making a plea for the acceptance of intramedullary
involvement in periosteal osteosarcoma when a
tumor presents radiographically on the surface of a long
bone with the epicenter of the tumor being in the
periosteum. There should be calcific densities in the
mass without the dense, well-differentiated tumor bone
of parosteal osteosarcoma. The histologic picture is that
of a primary chondroblastic osteosarcoma with a predominance
of low-grade malignant cartilage and only

scattered areas of lacy tumor osteoid. If these tumors
with areas of medullary involvement are treated as
periosteal osteosarcomas, limb salvage surgery can at
times produce good functional extremities (Figs. 6C and
7C), and the patient can be spared the dangers of very
toxic chemotherapy without an unacceptable risk of
metastases.

REFERENCES

I. Lichtenstein L. Tumors of periosteal origin. Cuncer 1955; 8:1068-
1069.
2. Unni KK, Dahlin DC, Beabout JW. Periosteal osteogenic sarcoma. Cuncer 1976; 37:2476-2485.
3. Bertoni F, Boriani S, Laus M, Campanacci M. Periosteal chondrosarcoma
and periosteal osteosarcoma. J Bone Join1 Surg 1982;
641735-736.
4. Spjut HJ. Ayala AG, De Santos LA, Murray JA. Periosteal
osteosarcoma. In: Management of Primary Bone and Soft Tissue
Tumors. Chicago: Year Book Medical Publishers, 1977; 79-95.
5. Enneking WF. Spanier SS, Goodman MA. Current concepts
review: The surgical staging of musculoskeletal sarcoma. J Bone Join!
Surg 1980: 62: 1027-1030.
6. Eilber FR, Mirra JJ, Grant TT. Weisenburger T. Morton DL. Is
amputation necessary for sarcomas? Ann Surg 1980; l92:43 1-437.
7. Simon MA, Enneking WE. The management of soft tissue
sarcomas of the extremities. J Bone Join[ Surg 1976; 58:317-327.
8. Wold LE, Unni KK, Raymond AK, Dahlin DC. High grade
surface osteosarcoma. Lab Invest 1983; 48:94A-95A.

The Lita Annenberg Hazen Awards for Excellence
in Clinical Research 1985
Nominations are being sought for candidates for the 1985 Lita Annenberg
Hazen Awards for Excellence in Clinical Research. Your participation is
requested in identifying a physician, or a team of physicians jointly conducting
research, working at any institution in the world, whose achievements and
potential for future, breakthroughs in clinical research are outstanding. The
Award Committee will select a physician-investigator or team who will be
awarded $50,000. An additional $50,000 will be provided for the support, for
up to 3 years, of a Research Fellow or Fellows whom the Award winner will
select as associates.
Nominations will be accepted until February 28, 1985. For further information
contact: James F. Glenn, MD, Chairman, The Lita Annenberg Hazen
Awards for Excellence in Clinical Research. Mount Sinai School of Medicine.
L
One Gustave L. Levy Place, New York. NY 10029.

 10970142, 1985, 1, Downloaded from https://acsjournals.onlinelibrary.wiley.com/doi/10.1002/1097-0142(19850101)55:1<165::AID-CNCR2820550126>3.0.CO;2-A, Wiley Online Library on [14/08/2024]. See the Terms and Conditions (https://onlinelibrary.wiley.com/terms-and-conditions) on Wiley Online Library for rules of use; OA articles are governed by the applicable Creative Commons License