Knockdown of Chk1, Wee1 and Myt1 by RNA Interference Abrogates
G2 Checkpoint and Induces Apoptosis

ABSTRACT

Mammalian cells undergo cell cycle arrest in response to DNA damage due to the
existence of multiple checkpoint response mechanisms. One such checkpoint pathway
operating at the G1 phase is frequently lost in cancer cells due to mutation of the p53
tumor suppressor gene. However, cancer cells often arrest at the G2 phase upon DNA
damage, due to activation of another checkpoint pathway that prevents the activation of
Cdc2 kinase. The kinases, Chk1, Wee1, and Myt1 are key regulators of this G2 checkpoint,
which act directly or indirectly to inhibit Cdc2 activity. Here we show that RNA
interference (RNAi)-mediated downregulation of Wee1 kinase abrogated an
Adriamycin®-induced G2 checkpoint in human cervical carcinoma Hela cells that are
defective in G1 checkpoint response. Wee1 downregulation sensitized HeLa cells to
Adriamycin®-induced apoptosis. Downregulation of Chk1 kinase in Hela cells also
caused a significant amount of cell death independent of DNA damage. In contrast, Myt1
downregulation abrogated Adriamycin®-induced G2 arrest but did not cause substantial
apoptosis. Reduction in Wee1, Chk1, or Myt1 levels did not sensitize normal human
mammary epithelial cells (HMEC) cells to Adriamycin®-induced apoptosis unlike the situation
in Hela cells. Our study reveals distinct roles for Chk1, Wee1, and Myt1 in G2
checkpoint regulation. The data reported here support the attractiveness of Wee1 and
Chk1 as molecular targets for abrogating the G2 DNA damage checkpoint arrest, a situation
that may selectively sensitize p53-deficient tumor cells to radiation or chemotherapy
treatment.

INTRODUCTION

The cell division cycle is a tightly regulated set of events that ensures proper duplication
of DNA and segregation of genetic materials. Progression of the cell cycle is controlled by
a series of cyclin-dependent kinases (CDKs), which in turn are tightly regulated by several
mechanisms. First, CDK (CDK1, 2, 4, 6) activity requires binding to a regulatory subunit,
cyclin (cyclin A, B, D, E, H). Cyclins are expressed only at specific points during the cell
cycle. Second, CDK activity is directly regulated through phosphorylation-mediated mechanisms.
Third, CDKs are negatively regulated through specific interaction with proteins
such as p14 (INK4a), p15 (INK4b), p21CIP1, and p27Kip2; collectively know as CDK
inhibitors (CDIs). Thus, CDK activity, in response to specific signals, is regulated by
modulation of cyclin levels, CDK phosphorylation, and CDI levels.1-3
When normal cells are subjected to DNA damage, cell cycle checkpoint pathways are
activated that can arrest cells in both the G1 and G2 phases. Checkpoint arrest allows cells
to repair damaged DNA in order to ensure maintenance of genomic integrity. Without
these checkpoints, cells could accumulate undesired mutations, which could eventually
lead to unregulated cell growth, cancer, or death.4 Indeed, most cancer cells are defective
at the G1 checkpoint control due to nonfunctional p53/Rb pathways.1 In addition to its
role in checkpoint control, p53 also regulates programmed cell death. p53 can initiate
apoptosis by transcriptionally activating proapoptotic Bcl-2 family members and repressing
antiapoptotic Bcl-2 proteins. p53 deficient tumor cells therefore are more resistant to
apoptosis than normal cells. One potential therapeutic approach is to exploit this G1
checkpoint deficiency by abrogating the functional G2 checkpoint in tumor cells to
enhance their apoptotic response to DNA damage. Combination of DNA damage and G2
checkpoint abrogators is likely to be selective for tumor cells, since DNA damage in the
absence of a G2 checkpoint could be more harmful to G1 checkpoint-deficient cancer cells
than to normal cells, which still have a functional G1 checkpoint response. Indeed, small
molecular weight G2 checkpoint abrogators, such as caffeine and UCN-01, have shown
promising results in sensitizing p53-deficient cells to apoptosis.5,6

www.landesbioscience.com Cancer Biology & Therapy 305
©

2004

Landes

Bioscience.

Do

Not

Distribute

The CDK responsible for the G2/M transition is Cdc2.7 In addition
to regulation through its association with cyclin B, both activating
and inactivating phosphorylations are required to modulate Cdc2
activity. In mammalian cells, the activating phosphorylation of Cdc2
at threonine 161 (T161) in the T-loop is catalyzed by Cdc2 activating
kinase, (CAK; Cdc7/cyclinH) and CAK activity is quite constant
throughout the cell cycle.8 The inhibitory phosphorylations of
threonine 14 (T14) and tyrosine 15 (Y15) at the ATP-binding pocket
are mediated by Wee1 and Myt1 kinases.9-13 Wee1 is the major
kinase phosphorylating the Y15 site. While Myt1 preferentially
phosphorylates the T14 site, it can also phosphorylate the Y15 site.
At the onset of mitosis, inhibitory phosphates at T14 and Y15 sites
of Cdc2 are removed by the dual-specific phosphatase Cdc25C14-16
triggering Cdc2 activation and progression of mitotic events.
Most cancer cells have lost their G1 checkpoint and therefore
only arrest at the G2 phase of the cell cycle when subjected to DNA
damage. This G2 arrest correlates with an increase of Cdc2 inhibitory
phosphorylation at the T14 and Y15 sites.17 Upon DNA damage,
the PI3K-like protein kinases, ataxia-telangiectasia-mutated (ATM)
and the ATM- and Rad3-related protein kinase (ATR) are activated.18-22
Activated ATM/ATR kinases subsequently phosphorylate and
activate Chk1/Chk2 kinases.23-26 Both Chk1 and Chk2 are known
to phosphorylate Cdc25C on serine 216 (S216) and this phosphorylation
makes Cdc25C functionally inactive.23,27 In addition,
Chk1 has also been reported to phosphorylate and increase the
kinase activity of Wee1.28-31 Thus either Cdc25C inactivation
and/or Wee1/Myt1 activation could contribute to G2 cell cycle
arrest in response to DNA damage. Mutations of both the T14 and
Y15 sites of Cdc2 to alanine and phenylalanine respectively, lead to
an activated form of Cdc2 that cannot be inhibited by phosphorylation.
Expression of this constitutively active Cdc2 mutant causes premature
mitosis even in the presence of damaged DNA.32-34 Inhibition
of Wee1, Myt1 and Chk1 can directly or indirectly reduce phosphorylation
of Cdc2 on the T14 and Y15 sites and cause premature
mitosis due to abrogation of the G2 checkpoint. Therefore, Wee1,
Myt1 and Chk1 could be envisioned as potential target(s) for cancer
therapeutic intervention. It is noteworthy that small molecular G2
checkpoint abrogators, such as UCN-01 and caffeine, are now
known to inhibit certain checkpoint regulatory kinases, although
they are not truly selective for these kinase targets. For example,
UCN-01 was first identified as protein kinase C (PKC) inhibitor but
later found to inhibit both Chk1 and Chk2.35,36 Caffeine, on the
other hand, can inhibit ATM/ATR, which are upstream regulators
of Chk1 and Chk2 kinases.37,38
Here, we have used an RNA interference (RNAi)-mediated gene
knockdown approach to investigate the comparative roles of Wee1,
Chk1, and Myt1 kinases in the G2 checkpoint pathway in Hela versus
normal human mammary epithelial cells (HMEC), which lack or
express functional p53 alleles, respectively. Our data suggest that
downregulation of Wee1 sensitizes Hela cells to DNA
damaging-induced apoptosis. Downregulation of Chk1 is lethal in
Hela cells independent of DNA damage but not in HMEC cells.
While downregulation of Myt1 was found to abrogate the
Adriamycin® induced G2 checkpoint, no appreciable apoptosis was
observed as occurred in the case of Chk1 or Wee1 downregulation.

MATERIALS AND METHODS

Cell Culture and siRNA Transfection. Hela cells were grown in DMEM
medium supplemented with 10% FBS and 20 µg/ml gentamicin. Human

mammary epithelial cells (HMEC) cells were purchased from Clonetics
(CC-0228) and grown in MEG medium as recommended. Transfections
were carried out by plating 10,000-20,000 cells per well on 12-well plates
or 100,000 cells per 10-cm dish. Invitrogen’s oligofectamine reagent was
used for transfection of siRNA duplexes. For each transfection, 0.1 nmol of
each siRNA and 2 µl Oligofectamine (12-well plates) and 0.6 nmol of each
siRNA and 9 µl Oligofectamine (10-cm dishes) were used following protocols
suggested by the manufacturer.
SiRNA Oligos and RT-PCR. The siRNA duplex oligos were purchased
from Dharmacon. The sense strand sequence of the oligos employed in the
study are as follows: Chk1 oligo#1, aagcagucgcagugaagauug; Chk1 oligo#2,
aaccagaugcucagagauucu; Wee1 oligo#1, aaugauuccuguggugaagac; Wee1
oligo#2, aacguauuggaaugauuccug; Wee1 oligo#3, aacuccgggguaguucucucu;
Myt1 oligo#1, aaccuggauucucccucaaga; Myt1 oligo#2, aagcguuccaugucaccauuc;
control oligo, aaagcccagccuucgaucaac. The control oligo was
designed using a random sequence bearing no significant homology to any
published gene or EST sequence as tested by BLAST analysis. Hela cells
were harvested two days after siRNA transfection and total RNA was prepared
with Invitrogen’s Trazol method (Invitrogen, Cat#15596-026). Semiquantitative
RT-PCRs were performed using Ambion’s QuantumRNA kit
(Cat# 1716) with 18S as internal standards. PCR primers for Chk1 were:
forward-gatatgaagcgtgccgtagac, reverse-ggctgagaactggagtacttc; for Wee1
were: forward-gaagcagagttgaaggatctc, reverse-cttcctcttgtcacagtgttc; and for
Myt1 were: forward-gtccttcttccagcagagctt, reverse-cagcatcatgacaaggacaga.
The primers were custom synthesized at GibcoBRL.
Antibodies and Immunoblots. A polyclonal antibody against Cdc2
(sc-747) and monoclonal antibodies against Chk1 (sc-8408), Wee1
(sc-5285), and vimentin (sc-6260) were purchased from Santa Cruz. A
phospho-specific antibody against Cdc2Yp15 and antibodies against Myt1
were obtained from Onyx Pharmaceuticals.13,31,39 For immunoblot analysis,
attached Hela cells were harvested by addition of 10 mM EDTA in PBS for
5 min. Both floating and attached cells were combined and centrifuged at
2,000 rpm for 5 min to collect the cell pellet. For HMEC cells, 0.25-mg/ml
trypsin (Clonetics, cc-5012) was used to remove attached cells from the cell
culture dish. Both floating and attached cells were combined in the same
manner as described above for Hela cells. Cell pellets were incubated in
50-to100 µl ice-cold lysis buffer [50 mM Hepes, pH7.4, 250 mM NaCl,
0.1% NP-40, 10 mM β-glycerophosphate, 1 mM NaF, 1 mM EDTA, 0.1
mM Na3VO4, 40 µl/ml complete proteinase cocktail (Roche, Cat#
1697498)] for 30 min on ice. Cell lysates were centrifuged at 10,000 rpm
for 5 min to collect the cell supernatants.
Clonogenic Cell Growth. Hela cells (10,000 cells/well) were plated on
12-well plates and transfected as described above. One day after transfection,
cells were trypsinized and 1/20 of the total cell population was plated
into individual wells of a 6-well plate and grown for 10 days in DMEM with
10% FBS and 20 µg/ml gentamicin. Cells were then stained with 0.25%
commassie blue in 10% acetic acid and 40% methanol for 20 min. After
staining, plates were washed three times with water and air-dried.
Cell Counting. Cells were transfected with the indicated siRNAs. Two
days after transfection, cells were treated with 250 nM Adriamycin®. Cells
were grown for an additional period of two days (Hela cells) or 10 days
(HMEC cells) after addition of Adriamycin®. Both floating and attached
cells were then collected separately and counted on a Coulter Counter.
Apoptosis Assays. Apoptotic DNA fragmentation was quantitated by an
ELISA assay. Hela cells were first plated on 12-well plates and transfected
with indicated siRNAs as described above. Transfected cells were trypsinized
the next day and replated after diluting 4-fold into 96-well plates. Two days
post-transfection, i.e, 1 day after plating on 96-well plates, the cells were
treated with 250 nM Adriamycin® in dimethyl sulfoxide (DMSO) or
mock-treated with DMSO alone. Eighteen hours after DNA damage, cells
were analyzed for apoptosis using the cell death detection ELISA plus (Roche,
Cat# 1 774 425). Cells were also analyzed by a flow cytometry-based assay
using an annexin V-PE apoptosis detection kit (BD PharMingen, Cat# 559763).
This assay detects cells in the early stages of apoptosis through specific binding
of labeled annexin V protein to the externalized phosphatidylserine molecules

G2 CHECKPOINT ABROGATION

306 Cancer Biology & Therapy 2004; Vol. 3 Issue 3
©

2004

Landes

Bioscience.

Do

Not

Distribute

www.landesbioscience.com Cancer Biology & Therapy 307

on the outer leaflet of the plasma membrane in unfixed apoptotic cells. For
this assay, Hela cells in 100-mm dishes were transfected with the indicated
siRNA duplexes and two days after transfection, cells were treated with
Adriamycin® for 18 hrs. Cells were harvested in 10 mM EDTA in PBS for
5 min. Both floating and attached cells were combined prior to cell staining
with the annexin V-PE kit as per manufacturer’s protocol.
Cell Cycle Analysis. Hela cells were plated, transfected, and treated as
for the annexin V-PE apoptosis assay. Adherent cells were collected from
tissue culture dishes by treatment with 10 mM EDTA in PBS for 5 min.
Cell pellets were resuspended in 0.5 ml PBS with 0.1% FBS and dropwise
added to 75% ice-cold ethanol overnight. The fixed cells were then centrifuged
at 2,000 rpm for 5 min, washed once in PBS containing 0.1% FBS, and
then treated with 0.5 ml PBS containing 0.2 mg/ml RNAse A and 50 µg/ml
propidium iodide (PI) for 30 min at 37˚C. Cells were passed through a 5
ml strainer-capped tubes and cell cycle distribution was analyzed as previously
described31 with the modification of using a BD LSR flowcytometer.

RESULTS

Downregulation of Wee1, Chk1 and Myt1 by siRNA. In order to
knockdown Wee1 expression, three pairs of siRNA based on the human
Wee1 sequence were designed and synthesized. The siRNAs were first individually
transfected into HeLa cells using Invitrogen’s oligofactamine
reagent. As shown in Figure 1, all three Wee1 siRNAs significantly reduced
Wee1 mRNA as measured by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Similar experiments
with Myt1 and Chk1 specific siRNA also yielded suppression of the
respective mRNA levels. Of the two Chk1 siRNAs tested, the Chk1#2 oligo
proved to be more effective than the Chk1#1oligo in reducing Chk1 mRNA
levels (Fig. 1). Chk1#2 siRNA was used for all subsequent experiments. The
two Myt1 siRNAs appeared equally effective in eliminating Myt1 specific
mRNA. In fact, no Myt1 mRNA was detected in cells transfected with
either of the specific siRNA duplexes (Fig. 1) and therefore we arbitrarily
chose the Myt1#2 siRNA for subsequent experiments.
The effects of siRNA treatment on respective protein levels were evaluated
by immunoblots. Although the reduction at the mRNA level was significant
with each individual Wee1 siRNA (Fig. 1), the reductions in Wee1 protein
levels were incomplete (data not shown). In an attempt to achieve a more
complete reduction of Wee1 protein level, we tested the combination of all

three Wee1 siRNAs. Immunobloting showed that Wee1 protein was consistently
reduced by over 90% when a combination of three Wee1 siRNAs were
transfected together (Fig. 2A). Therefore, a pool of these three siRNAs was
used for subsequent experiments. As shown in Figure 2, expression of the
Chk1, Wee1, and Myt1 proteins were specifically reduced by their corresponding
siRNA duplexes. Among the seven siRNAs tested in the above
experiment, greater than 90% downregulation of the target protein was
achieved by all siRNAs either singly or in combination. Similar results were
also obtained with primary human mammary epithelial cells (Fig. 2B).
Reduction of Wee1, Myt1, and Chk1 protein lasted for a minimum of 5 days
post-transfection in Hela cells (data not shown).
Knockdown of Wee1, Myt1 and Chk1 Reduced Cdc2-Y15
Phosphorylation in Hela Cells. We observed that treatment with Chk1
siRNA and to a lesser extent with Wee1 siRNA caused a dramatic mobility
shift of Myt1 (Fig. 2A). Slower migration of Myt1 on SDS-PAGE was
reported to be associated with mitosis.13 These observations indicate that
treatments of Wee1 and Chk1 siRNA altered the cell cycle distribution of
Hela cells. Since Wee1 and Myt1 directly phosphorylate Cdc2 on Y15 and

G2 CHECKPOINT ABROGATION

Figure 1. Detection of human Wee1, Chk1, and Myt1 RNA expression in
siRNA-treated Hela cells by semi-quantitative RT-PCR. Hela cells were transfected
with control or the indicated siRNA in 12-well plates. Two days after
transfection, cells were harvested, and total RNA was prepared with
GibcoBRL’s trazol method. Semi-quantitative RT-PCR was then performed to
measure the amount of target downregulation with 18S as internal control.

Figure 2. Effect of DNA damage and Wee1, Chk1, or Myt1 downregulation
on Cdc2-Y15 phosphorylation. Cells were transfected with the indicated
siRNA using oligofectamine reagent as described in the material and
method section. Two days after transfection, cells were treated with 250 nM
Adriamycin® overnight. The cells were then harvested for immunoblotting
with the indicated antibodies. (A) Hela cells (B) HMEC cells.

A

B
©

2004

Landes

Bioscience.

Do

Not

Distribute
T14 sites and Chk1 indirectly affects Cdc2 phosphorylation,
the status of Cdc2 phosphorylation in response to the knockdown
of Wee1, Myt1, and Chk1 was evaluated. The Cdc2-Y15
phosphorylation was reduced by Wee1, Myt1, or Chk1 knockdown
in Hela cells, while Wee1 knockdown was by far the most
efficient in producing this effect (Fig. 2A). Furthermore, a
combination of Wee1 and Chk1 siRNA completely eliminated
the Cdc2-Y15 phosphorylation, but a combination of Wee1
and Myt1 did not generate a synergistic decrease of the Cdc2-Y15
phosphorylation. In contrast, Myt1 downregulation significantly
reduced Cdc2-T14 phosphorylation (data not shown). These
results are consistent with the current model that Wee1 (directly)
and Chk1 (indirectly, via its action on Cdc25), modulate the
phosphorylation of Cdc2-Y15. In contrast, Myt1 mainly regulates
the phosphorylation of Cdc2-T14 and has a less important role
in the phosphorylation of Cdc2-Y15.
Upon DNA damage induced by treatment of HeLa cells
with 250 nM Adriamycin®, the Cdc2-Y15 phosphorylation
increased in control siRNA-transfected cells as anticipated due
to the G2 arrest (Fig. 2A). Chk1 knockdown blocked the
Adriamycin®-induced increase of Cdc2-Y15 phosphorylation
although the basal Cdc2- Y15 phosphoryaltion levels were
modestly decreased by Chk1 knockdown. Simultaneous knockdown
of Wee1 and Chk1 expression completely eliminated
both the basal and the Adriamycin®-induced phosphorylation
of Cdc2-Y15 (Fig. 2A). These results demonstrate that Chk1
plays an essential role in response of Hela cells to DNA damage.
Interestingly, knockdown of Wee1 expression partially
blocked the increase of Cdc2-Y15 phosphorylation due to
Adriamycin® treatment although the basal levels of Cdc2-Y15
phosphorylation were significantly lower when compared to
control cells (Fig. 2A). Similarly, Myt1 knockdown did not
block the increase of Cdc2-Y15 phosphorylation in response to
Adriamycin®, although it lowered the basal phosphorylation of
Cdc2-Y15 to an extent similar to that observed with Chk1
knockdown. A double knockdown of Wee1 and Myt1 expression
completely prevented the increase of Cdc2-Y15 phosphorylation
by Adriamycin®. These data suggest that Wee1 and
Myt1 have a partially redundant role in the cellular response to
Adriamycin®. Our results clearly indicate distinct roles for Chk1,
Wee1, and Myt1 in regulation of Cdc2-Y15 phosphoryaltion in
response to the DNA damaging agent Adriamycin®.
Our attempts to study the phosphorylation status of
Cdc2-Y15 in HMEC cells yielded inconclusive results due to
weak signals on Cdc2-Y15 immunoblots (Fig. 2B; data not
shown). Collectively, our data demonstrate that downregulation
of Wee1, Chk1, and Myt1 can reduce Cdc2-Y15 phosphorylation to various
degrees while the total Cdc2 expression is not changed by any RNAi in Hela
cells. Downregulation of Wee1, the major kinase that phosphorylates Cdc2
on Y15, produces the most significant reduction of Cdc2-Y15 phosphorylation.Downregulation
of Wee1, Chk1, and Myt1 Abrogates the G2 Checkpoint
in Hela Cells. Since Wee1, Chk1, and Myt1 all play roles at the G2/M
transition, the effects of their downregulation on cell cycle distribution were
analyzed by flow cytometry. As shown in Figure 3, both Wee1 and Myt1
siRNA abrogated Adriamycin®-induced G2 arrest. In control siRNA treated
cells, as expected the population of G1 cells decreased from 60.6% to 1.5%

upon Adriamycin® treatment. However, in Wee1 and Myt1 siRNA treated
cells, the G1 population remained at 55% and 60%, respectively, even in the
presence of Adriamycin®. The effect of Chk1 on cell cycle distribution was
difficult to evaluate since Chk1 siRNA treatment resulted in a large population
of cells with less than G1 DNA content (Fig. 3).
It is worth noting that Wee1 siRNA treatment increased the amount of
cells with DNA content less than G1, the apoptotic cell population, in the
presence of Adriamycin®. Furthermore, the combination of Wee1 and Myt1
siRNA increased the frequency of apoptosis under basal conditions and
further increased the fraction of apoptotic cells in response to Adriamycin®
treatment. These flow cytometry analysis data are generally in agreement

G2 CHECKPOINT ABROGATION

Figure 3. Effects of Wee1, Chk1, and Myt1 siRNAs on Hela cell
cycle distribution and the preG1 peak in the presence or absence
of Adriamycin® treatment. Hela cells were plated in 10 cm dishs.
Two days after transfection, the cells were treated with 250 nM
Adriamycin® or a corresponding volume of DMSO. The cells were
then harvested for cell cycle analysis 18 hrs after Adriamycin®
treatment.

308 Cancer Biology & Therapy 2004; Vol. 3 Issue 3
©

2004

Landes

Bioscience.

Do

Not

Distribute

with results obtained by other apoptotic assays in Wee1 or Myt1 siRNA
treated cells (Fig. 5). Chk1 siRNA transfected cells displayed a high percent
of cells with DNA content less than G1. These data are consistent with the
notion that Chk1 is required for Hela cell survival. The size of the pre-G1
peak increased for Wee1 transfected cells after DNA damage but not to an
extent corresponding to the percentage of apoptosis shown in Figure 5C.
This could be due to incomplete DNA degradation at an early stage of
apoptosis, such that the DNA content of the apoptotic cells was not significantly
less than the G1 population.40
Abrogation of the G2 checkpoint by knockdown of Wee1 and Myt1 is
consistent with decreased phosphorylation of Cdc2-Y15 in the presence of
Adriamycin® (Fig. 2A). However, we were surprised to find that Myt1
downregulation abrogated the G2 checkpoint to the same extent as Wee1
siRNA, although Cdc2-Y15 phosphorylation is clearly higher in the Myt1
siRNA treated cells compared to that observed in the Wee1 siRNA treated
cells. One possible explanation for this finding is that Myt1 siRNA activates
Cdc2 to the same extent as the Wee1 siRNA because phosphorylation of
T14 in Cdc2 is also blocked by Myt1, but not by Wee1 siRNA. Our data
clearly establish that both Wee1 and Myt1 siRNA can abrogate the G2
checkpoint in response to DNA damage in Hela cells.
Effects of Chk1 and Wee1 Downregulation on Apoptosis. The effect of
siRNA on cell viability was investigated. We observed that Chk1 siRNA
treatment significantly increased the number of floating cells (a 70%
increase over the control) four days after transfection in Hela cells (Table 1).

The floating cells were detected as early as two days after Chk1 siRNA treatment
(data not shown). In contrast, floating cells were not detected in Chk1
siRNA treated HMEC cells although the Chk1 protein was effectively
downregulated (Fig. 2B). The HMEC cells were monitored up to 12 days
with no significant increase in floating cells. Wee1 siRNA produced little
effect (5% floating cells over the control) while Myt1 siRNA also had a
limited effect in Hela cells (12% over the control) (Table 1). We tested
Adriamycin® at a concentration which did not induce massive cell death in
Hela cells (8% over the control, Table 1). Adriamycin® further increased the
incidence of floating cells in Chk1 siRNA treated cells. Interestingly
Adriamycin® dramatically increased the incidence of floating cells in both
Wee1 siRNA and Myt1 siRNA treated cells (40% and 26%, respectively
over the control) (Table 1). These results demonstrate that Wee1 siRNA
produces the most dramatic sensitization of Hela cells to Adriamycin®
induced cell death. Similar experiments were performed with HMEC cells.
Downregulation of Wee1, Chk1, and Myt1 by siRNA did not significantly
sensitize HMEC cells to Adriamycin® treatment (Table 1).
To determine the long-term effects of suppression of G2 regulators on
cell growth, transfected Hela cells were grown in 6-well plates for 10 days as
described by the clonogenic assay procedure in Materials and Methods. As
shown in Figure 4, cells treated with Chk1 siRNA formed significantly
fewer colonies than cells transfected with control siRNA. Myt1 siRNA treatment
also resulted in fewer colonies compared to the control, but allowed
more colony growth than Chk1 siRNA treatment. In contrast, transfection
of Wee1 siRNA had a minor effect on colony formation. The colony-formation
data correlate well with previously described data summarized in
Table 1, further supporting the induction of cell death by Chk1 siRNA.
To investigate whether the observed cell death was due to apoptosis, two
types of assays were conducted. In an ELISA assay designed to detect apoptotic
DNA fragmentation, Wee1 or Myt1 suppression alone did not cause a
significant incidence of apoptosis, whereas Chk1 downregulation triggered
massive apoptosis (Fig. 5A). Wee1 downregulation significantly sensitized
Hela cells to apoptosis in the presence of Adriamycin® (Fig. 5A and B). The
above results were corroborated by a second assay based on annexin V-binding
to membrane phosphatidylserines designed to detect early apoptotic cells.
This experiment confirmed that Chk1 siRNA alone, in the absense of DNA
damaging agent, induced apoptosis while Wee1 siRNA significantly sensitized
Hela cells to apoptosis, but only in response to Adriamycin®. The extent of
apoptosis in the Adriamycin® treated cell population cannot be accurately
calculated due to a fluorescence signal shift in annexin-negative cells after
Adriamycin® treatment. However, by comparison of control and Wee1
siRNA transfected cells in the absence or presence of Adriamycin® as
reference, the percentage of apoptotic cells was estimated. Adriamycin®
treatment increased the incidence of apoptosis in Wee1 siRNA transfected
cells from 17% to 50%, compared to negligible increases in cells transfected
with either Chk1 or Myt1 (68% to 73% and 24% to 26% respectively)
(Fig. 5C).

DISCUSSION

The aim of this study was to compare the roles of the three G2
checkpoint regulators, Wee1, Chk1, and Myt1, in regulation of the
G2 checkpoint by using an RNA interference-mediated gene knockdown
approach. We were able to significantly reduce the expression of
Wee1-, Chk1-, and Myt1- kinases as judged by semi-quantitative
RT-PCR and immunoblots. Our data demonstrate that downregulation
of Wee1 sensitizes Hela cells but not normal HMEC cells to
apoptosis in response to Adriamycin®. Chk1 downregulation alone
is lethal in Hela cells but not in normal HMEC cells in the absence
of DNA damage. Myt1 knockdown can abrogate Adriamycin®-
induced G2 arrest, but does not lead to cell death.
Wee1 was first identified in S. pombe from a genetic screen for wee
mutants that undergo mitosis and cell division at a reduced size compared
with wild type.41,42 It encodes a protein kinase that phosphorylates

G2 CHECKPOINT ABROGATION

Table 1 EFFECT OF SIRNA TREATMENT ON CELL ATTACHMENT

Treatment Control Wee1 Chk1 Chk1/Wee1 Myt1 Myt1/Wee1

DMSO 94.3 90.6 32.4 40.9 82.3 73.3

Adriamycin 86.6 50.1 16.7 21.4 56.5 43.3

DMSO 86 81.9 81 79 78.9 73.2

Adriamycin 63.3 67.4 64.7 64.1 56 62.4

Hela or HMEC cells were transfected with the indicated siRNA as described in Materials and Methods. Two
days after transfection, cells were treated with 250 nM Adriamycin® or DMSO. Two days after
Adriamycin®treatment, both floating and attached Hela cells were harvested separately and counted
with a Coulter counter. Total cells were calculated from the combination of floating cells and attached
cells. The percentage of attached cells was expressed as the attached cells divided by the total cells. HMEC
cells were harvested ten days after Adriamycin®treatment and counted the same as for Hela cells.

Figure 4. Effect of siRNA treatment on Hela cell colony formation. Hela cells
were transfected with the indicated siRNA in 12-well plates. One day after
transfection, cells were trypsinized and both floating and attached cells
were combined. One twentieth of original cells were replated on 6-well
plate. Cells were then grown for another 10 days before fixing and staining.

www.landesbioscience.com Cancer Biology & Therapy 309
©

2004

Landes

Bioscience.

Do

Not

Distribute
and inhibits Cdc2.43 Wee1 can be phosphorylated
by Chk1 kinase28 and both Wee1 and
Cdc25 have been implicated in DNA damage-induced
G2 checkpoint control.29 Human
Wee1 was first identified by complementation
of fission yeast wee1/mik1 deficient
cells.44 Consistent with its role as initially
defined in yeast, Wee1 overexpression causes
G2 arrest and mutation of Cdc2Y15 to F in
yeast and T14 to A and Y15 to F in mammalian
Cdc2 cause premature mitosis. When
cells are subjected to DNA damage, Chk1 can
phosphorylate Wee1 and phosphorylated
Wee1 interacts with 14-3-3.30,31,45 This interaction
can increase Wee1 protein stability and
kinase activity, thereby keeping Cdc2 in its
inactive state.
Wee1 has also been implicated in apoptosis.
It has been reported that Wee1 overexpression
can suppress granzyme-induced apoptosis.46
Wee1 can also protect cells from HIV Vprinduced
apoptosis.47 Furthermore, Wee1
protein is cleaved in Fas ligand induced
apoptosis48,49 and the Wee1 protein is
reduced in HIV Vpr-induced apoptosis,47
implying a role of this kinase in apoptosis.
Depletion of Wee1 by siRNA in Hela cells
alone has been reported to cause apoptosis
(the apoptotic cells population increased from
18% to 30% three days after siRNA treatment).47
Our data are consistent with the published
results, as we observed an increase in the
apoptotic fraction from 6% to 17% under
similar conditions. However, we noted that
the sensitizing effect of Wee1 downregulation
in response to Adriamycin® is much more dramatic. Clearly, we
have demonstrated that Wee1 siRNA abrogates the G2 checkpoint
and sensitizes Hela cells to apoptosis in response to DNA damaging
induced by Adriamycin®.
Chk1 siRNA treatment alone without DNA damage causes
apoptosis in Hela cells but not in HMEC cells. This observation
indicates that cancer cells and normal cells may have differential
sensitivity to Chk1 downregulation. Therefore, downregulation of
Chk1 may selectively induce apoptosis in cancer cells. Alternatively,
Chk2 or C-TAK150 may exert a partially redundant function in
HMEC but not in Hela cells. CHK1 is required for DNA damage
checkpoint but is not an essential gene for normal cell growth in
yeast.51,52 However, previous studies in higher eukaryotes also support
an essential function of Chk1 in cell proliferation or viability. First,
knockout of the drosophila and mouse homologues were embryonic

lethal.24,53 Second, Chk1-/- ES cells could not be generated, suggesting
that Chk1 is required for cell proliferation.24,54 Furthermore, downregulation
of Chk1 using anti-sense and ribozyme approaches also
caused significant cell death in the absence of DNA damage in
mammalian cells.55 However, other studies indicate that Chk1 inhibition
might not be lethal in mammalian cells. It was shown that Chk1
downregulation abrogated radiation-induced S and G2 checkpoints56,57
but had no significant effect on cell death. Another study
carried out with Chk1 and Chk2 peptide inhibitors derived from the
Chk1/Chk2 phosphorylation sequence in Cdc25,58 showed no
increase of cell death although the peptide inhibitors abrogated DNA
damage-induced G2 checkpoint.
There are several possible reasons to explain the apparent discrepancies
on whether Chk1 is an essential gene in higher eukaryotes. One
possible difference is the completeness of Chk1 downregulation.

G2 CHECKPOINT ABROGATION

Figure 5A and B. Wee1 downregulation sensitizes
Adriamycin® induced apoptosis in Hela cells. (A)
Apoptosis detection by measurment of DNA fragmentation
in 96-well plates. Each OD reading is an
average of duplicate 96-well plate ELISA assays from
two siRNA transfections. (B) Fold of apoptosis with vs.
without 250 nM Adriamycin® treatment. The fold
change is an average of two independent experiments
as described in (A).

310 Cancer Biology & Therapy 2004; Vol. 3 Issue 3
©

2004

Landes

Bioscience.

Do

Not

Distribute

The Chk1 siRNAs utilized in the published studies are targeted to
regions different from our Chk1 siRNAs.56,57 The extent of Chk1
downregulation appears complete in our study and in the study
reported by Zhao et al57 but not in the report by Sorensen et al.56 A
second possible difference could be due to the time point selected for
analysis. While Sorensen et al. harvested cells 30 to 36 hrs after transfection,
we normally harvested cells 64 to 68 hrs after transfection.
In our experiments, floating cells, presumably dead cells, are not visible
at 28 hrs but appear at 44 hrs after siRNA transfection (data not
shown). Furthermore, the Cdc25C peptide inhibitors may only
inhibit the phosphorylation of Cdc25C by Chk1 and Chk2. Those
peptides might not efficiently inhibit Cdc25A because they are
based on the Cdc25C sequence surrounding the phosphorylation
site S216, which has only 40% sequence homology with the Cdc25A

S123 that is the phosphorylation site
recognized by Chk1.
If Chk1 is essential for Hela cells, the
next key question is why Chk1-deficiency
in HMEC cells did not cause cell death.
One possible explanation lies with the
p53 status of these cells. Hela cells do
not have functional p53 and DNA
damage only causes G2 arrest. HMEC
cells, on the other hand, have wild-type
p53 and can arrest at both the G1 and
G2 phases of the cell cycle after DNA
damage. Chk1 siRNA treatment of
Hela cells renders a loss of both G1 and
G2 checkpoints whereas HMEC cells
may retain a normal G1 checkpoint in
response to the same treatment. It has
been reported that Chk1-deficiency
alone can increase Cdc25A to super-physiological
levels.56,57 The high level of
Cdc25A may contribute to the G2
checkpoint abrogation in Chk1 siRNA
treated cells. Therefore, Chk1 siRNA
selectively kills tumor cells. Chk1 downregulation
abrogates G2 checkpoint in
tumor cells while damaged DNA can be
repaired in normal cells because of the
existence of a G1 checkpoint. Another
explanation for the difference in
response between Hela and HMEC cells
is that Hela cells grow much faster than
HMEC cells. The rapid cell cycling of
Hela cells might render them more sensitive
to Chk1 siRNA downregulation
compared to HMEC cells.
In mammalian cells both T14 and
Y15 are phosphorylated. The T14 phosphorylation
is catalyzed by the membrane-associated
kinase, Myt1.13 The
role of this kinase in the G2/M transition
is not very clear. Downregulation of Myt1
in mammalian cells with ribozyme and
anti-sense was not successful in the past59
and unpublished data). Drosophila
Myt1 downregulation has been achieved
using a siRNA approach.59 In that study,
the authors found that dMyt1 reduction
increased the rate of cell proliferation and decreased Cdc2T14 phosphorylation.
They also reported that a reduction of Cdc2Y15 phosphorylation
is only observed by downregulation of both dMyt1 and
dWee1, but not by dWee1 downregulation alone. Our data show
that the human Myt1 kinase is successfully downregulated using a
siRNA approach. The human Myt1 reduction alone caused cell
death as shown by less colony formation (Fig. 4) and a higher incidence
of apoptosis cells (Fig. 5C) in the absence of DNA damage.
The extent of apoptosis, however, is much less than that induced by
Chk1 siRNA alone. Adriamycin® treatment of cells transfected with
Myt1 siRNA, increases their apoptotic frequency, but not to the extent
observed in Wee1 siRNA treated cells (Fig. 5A and B). Collectively,
the data generated in our study point to distinct cellular functions of
Wee1, Myt1, and Chk1.

G2 CHECKPOINT ABROGATION

Figure 5C. Apoptosis measured by flowcytometry for annexin V-PE staining.

www.landesbioscience.com Cancer Biology & Therapy 311

C
©

2004

Landes

Bioscience.

Do

Not

Distribute

In summary, among the three potential G2 checkpoint abrogation
targets tested in this report, Wee1 is likely to be the most promising
kinase of pharmacological intervention based on multiple observations.
First, Wee1 downregulation alone did not cause significant cell death
compared to Chk1 and Myt1. Secondly, Wee1 siRNA treatment
dramatically sensitized cancer cells but not normal cells to apoptosis
in response to Adriamycin®. Therefore, the combination of a Wee1
inhibitor with a DNA damaging agent may serve to selectively kill
cancer cells. Since downregulation of Chk1 alone killed Hela cells,
but not HMEC cells, Chk1 may also represent a viable target.
Studies aimed at functional knock down of these targets in tumorbearing
animals are warranted to compare the relative merits of these
potential anti-cancer drug targets.
