Critical Reviews in Oncology/Hematology
Volume 57, Issue 2, February 2006, Pages 107-121

An overview of apoptosis and the prevention of
colorectal cancer

AlastairJ.M. Watson

Show more

https://doi.org/10.1016/j.critrevonc.2005.06.005

Get rights and content

Abstract

Colorectal cancer arises as a result of the accumulation of genetic errors many of which affect the

control of apoptosis. Effective chemoprevention strategies for colorectal cancer must rectify these

genetic defects. Mutation of apc is often the initiating genetic lesion in colorectal cancers that

develop along the chromosomal instability pathway. Depending on the cellular context, loss of apc

activates the Wnt signalling pathway causing immediate widespread apoptosis of colorectal

epithelial cells and defects in differentiation and cell migration. Only cells that are inherently

resistant to apoptosis survive this initial wave of apoptosis. These surviving cells constitute the

epithelial population that develop into adenomas. Two gene targets of the Wnt signalling pathway

are of particular relevance to apoptosis. Although controversial, survivin may function to inhibit

apoptosis. MYC has two outputs in normal cells, the induction of apoptosis and proliferation. These

opposing functions work so that MYC can only induce cell proliferation in cells if apoptosis is

disabled. p53 couples apoptosis to mitogenic signals and survival pathways. Under some

circumstances, NF-κB can act as an inhibitor of apoptosis possibly through increased expression of

bcl-x . Tumours that evolve by the microsatellite instability pathway often have mutations in the

proapoptotic gene bax. Colonic adenomas express cyclo-oxygenase-2 (COX-2) and may be targets of

chemoprevention before the development of malignancy. However, the recent discovery that coxibs

increase the risk of serious cardiovascular events limits their use as chemopreventive agents.

Nevertheless, aspirin remains a drug of great interest as it is already known to reduce the risk of

colorectal cancer by up to 50%. The balance of evidence shows that high vegetable fibre diets can

prevent colorectal cancer, probably via the fermentation of butyrate enhancing the apoptotic

response to DNA damage.

Share Cite

L
Introduction

On a global scale, colorectal cancer is the fourth commonest malignant neoplasm after lung, breast

and prostate [1]. As will be discussed below, approximately 90% of colorectal cancers are derived

from benign adenomatous lesions which are estimated to take 5–15 years to evolve into invasive

cancer (for review, see [2], [3]). A wealth of epidemiological and clinical trial data suggests that if

these premalignant lesions are identified and removed, the subsequent development of colorectal

cancer is aborted [4], [5], [6]. Unfortunately, adenomas are largely asymptomatic and so require

population-based screening programmes for their detection. Colorectal cancer develops through a

number of well characterized stages based on the degree of invasion. When the cancer is confined to

the wall of the bowel (Stage 1, T N M ), resection is essentially curative with 5 year survival rates of

90% or more. However, in Stage IV disease where distant metastases are present, the 5 year survival

drops to 15% [7]. Overall, the 5 year survival rate of colorectal cancer is 50%.

These diagnostic challenges have led investigators to attempt to prevent adenoma formation with the

minimum of risk. The long natural history of adenomas, their accessibility to biopsy and the

existence of two inherited forms of colorectal cancer whose genetic changes mirror those of sporadic

cancer have enabled investigation of molecular pathogenesis of sporadic colorectal cancer in great

detail, perhaps more than any other neoplasm [8]. These investigations have shown that numerous

errors in pathways controlling apoptosis (programmed cell death) occur during the development of

colorectal cancer. These abnormalities render cells with clinically significant mutations resistant to

elimination through apoptosis (programmed cell death). Abnormalities in core apoptosis

mechanisms go hand in hand with inherent resistance to chemotherapy and radiotherapy. Clinical

evidence is emerging that defective apoptosis is of pathogenic significance [9]. Apoptosis rates in

rectal mucosa are inversely related to the presence of adenomas, while the clinical response of

adenomas to treatment with the COX-2 inhibitor celecoxib correlates positively with apoptosis [10],

[11]. Thus, a full understanding of molecular abnormalities in apoptosis and its relationship to other

molecular pathogenic mechanisms is essential for the rational development of prevention strategies

against colorectal cancer.

Section snippets

Molecular pathogenesis of colorectal cancer

Hahn and Weinberg have argued that a normal cell has only to acquire six phenotypes in order to

behave as a fully transformed malignant cell. These phenotypes are resistance to growth inhibition,

immortalization, independence from mitogenic stimulation, the ability to acquire their own blood

supply, the ability to invade and metastasize and the ability to suppress or evade apoptosis [12].

These characteristics are acquired through the mutation of key genes regulating these functions.

The…

Vegetable products

A number of dietary components have been reported to cause apoptosis with the implication that

mutant cells will, in this way, be eliminated thereby preventing cancer. Such inferences are fraught

1 0 0
with difficulty as modulation of cell death may not necessarily be responsible for cancer protection in

the complex environment of the human gut [110]. Diets high in fibre (non-starch polysaccharides)

have been recommended to prevent colorectal cancer [111], [112]. Epidemiological studies and…

Conclusions

The majority of genes that are functionally important in the pathogenesis of colorectal cancer in

some way inactivate or raise the threshold for induction of apoptosis, giving a growth advantage to

neoplastic and malignant clones. Clinical data are emerging that apoptosis in human colonic

epithelium is inversely related to cancer development. Studies of mouse models are starting to

illustrate how apoptosis fits in and interacts with the other important phenotypes required by cancer

cells as…

Reviewers

Prof. Chris Paraskeva, Department of Pathology and Microbiology, School of Medical Sciences,

University of Bristol, University Walk, Bristol BS8 1TD, UK.

Prof. E.G.E. De Vries, M.D., Ph.D., Groningen University Hospital, Department of Medical Oncology,

P.O. Box 30.001, NL-9700 RB Groningen, The Netherlands.

Dr. Nadir Arber, Tel Aviv Sourasky Medical Center, Weizmann 6, Tel Aviv 64238, Israel.…

Alastair J.M. Watson is professor of medicine at the University of Liverpool and head of the Division of

Gastroenterology in the School of Clinical Sciences. He qualified in 1980 from Cambridge and London

Universities. In 1985, he became a research fellow with Michael Farthing in St. Bartholomew's

hospital from where he obtained in 1989 a Medical Doctorate on the absorption of short chain fatty

acids. He became a post-doctoral fellow with Mark Donowitz and Chip Montrose at Johns Hopkins

Medical …

Recommended articles



