Article

Dependence on the Pyrimidine Biosynthetic Enzyme

DHODH Is a Synthetic Lethal Vulnerability in Mutant

KRAS-Driven Cancers

Graphical Abstract

Highlights

d DHODH inhibitors selectively inhibit the growth of KRAS
mutant cell lines

d The inhibitors affect energy metabolism and glutamine levels
in sensitive lines

d DHODH inhibitors synergize with some clinically used
anticancer agents

Authors
Malvika Koundinya, Judith Sudhalter,
Albane Courjaud, ...,
Ivan Cornella-Taracido,
Rosalia Arrebola, Aaron Morris

Correspondence
sslicht@gmail.com (S.L.),
aaronjmorris@gmail.com (A.M.)

In Brief

Koundinya et al. show that inhibitors of
the pyrimidine biosynthetic enzyme
dihydroorotate dehydrogenase
selectively inhibit the growth of KRAS
mutant cell lines. Differential sensitivity of
the mutant lines correlates with
differential effects of the inhibitors on
primary energy metabolism and
glutamine levels, and the inhibitors
synergize with some clinically used
anticancer agents.

Koundinya et al., 2018, Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717
June 21, 2018 ª 2018 Elsevier Ltd.
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2018.03.005
Cell Chemical Biology
Article

Dependence on the Pyrimidine Biosynthetic Enzyme
DHODH Is a Synthetic Lethal Vulnerability in Mutant
KRAS-Driven Cancers

Malvika Koundinya,1 Judith Sudhalter,1 Albane Courjaud,2 Bruno Lionne,2 Gaetan Touyer,2 Luc Bonnet,2
Isabelle Menguy,2 Isabelle Schreiber,2 Christelle Perrault,2 Stephanie Vougier,2 Brigitte Benhamou,2 Bailin Zhang,3
Timothy He,3 Qiang Gao,3 Patricia Gee,3 Daniel Simard,3,4 M. Paola Castaldi,4 Ronald Tomlinson,4 Stephan Reiling,5
Matthieu Barrague,6 Richard Newcombe,1 Hui Cao,7 Yanjun Wang,8 Fangxian Sun,8 Joshua Murtie,8 Mark Munson,6
Eric Yang,7 David Harper,1 Monsif Bouaboula,1 Jack Pollard,7 Claudine Grepin,2 Carlos Garcia-Echeverria,3 Hong Cheng,3
Francisco Adrian,1 Christopher Winter,1 Stuart Licht,3,9,
* Ivan Cornella-Taracido,4 Rosalia Arrebola,2 and Aaron Morris1,
* 1Cancer Biology, Oncology Division, Sanofi, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
2LGCR-LIT, Sanofi, Vitry-Sur-Seine 94400, France
3Biochemistry, Bioanalytics, and Chemical Biology, Oncology Division, Sanofi, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
4Chemistry, Oncology Division, Sanofi, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
5LGCR-SDI, Oncology Division, Sanofi, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
6LGCR, Oncology Division, Sanofi, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
7TEM-BioInformatics, Oncology Division, Sanofi, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
8In Vivo Pharmacology, Oncology Division, Sanofi, Cambridge, MA 02138, USA
9Lead Contact
*Correspondence: sslicht@gmail.com (S.L.), aaronjmorris@gmail.com (A.M.)
https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2018.03.005

SUMMARY

Activating KRAS mutations are major oncogenic
drivers in multiple tumor types. Synthetic lethal
screens have previously been used to identify targets
critical for the survival of KRAS mutant cells, but their
application to drug discovery has proven challenging,
possibly due in part to a failure of monolayer
cultures to model tumor biology. Here, we report the
results of a high-throughput synthetic lethal screen
for small molecules that selectively inhibit the
growth of KRAS mutant cell lines in soft agar. Chemoproteomic
profiling identifies the target of the
most KRAS-selective chemical series as dihydroorotate
dehydrogenase (DHODH). DHODH inhibition is
shown to perturb multiple metabolic pathways.
In vivo preclinical studies demonstrate strong antitumor
activity upon DHODH inhibition in a pancreatic
tumor xenograft model.

INTRODUCTION

Despite the advance of pathway-targeted therapeutics, KRAS
mutant cancers still remain a largely unmet medical need. The
prevalence of activating KRAS mutations is particularly high
(greater than 90%) in pancreatic ductal adenocarcinoma
(Bardeesy and DePinho, 2002), which has a notoriously poor
prognosis. KRAS mutations are also prevalent in lung and colon
cancers, and the presence of these mutations negatively impacts
therapeutic efficacy (Linardou et al., 2008). While direct
targeting of the KRAS protein has shown renewed promise

(Hunter et al., 2014; Ostrem et al., 2013; Sun et al., 2012),
KRAS inhibitors have not yet entered the clinic. Synthetic
lethality screens have frequently been used to find alternative
points of intervention in mutant KRAS-driven cancers, but the results
of these screens have not yet been translated to clinical
benefit.
Previous synthetic lethal screening efforts (Cox et al., 2014)
have mainly used RNAi as a means of identifying potential targets
(Barbie et al., 2009; Kim et al., 2016; Luo et al., 2009; Scholl
et al., 2009), although a few screens (Shaw et al., 2011; Steckel
et al., 2012) have been performed with small chemical libraries.
In all cases, these screens have relied on adherent monolayer
(2D) cell cultures, and in most cases have used only a matched
pair of mutant/wild-type (WT) cell lines. To improve the probability
of finding translatable targets, it might be beneficial to use
more physiologically relevant cellular models and to screen
larger panels of cell lines (Cox et al., 2014).
In an effort to discover translatable mutant KRAS synthetic lethal
targets, we have performed a 3D clonogenic synthetic lethal
screen with a diverse small-molecule library of 280,000 compounds
across six mutant KRAS-dependent cell lines and four
KRAS-independent cell lines. We report here the results from
this screen, and the identification and characterization of dihydroorotate
dehydrogenase (DHODH) as the target of one of
the most KRAS mutant-selective compounds. As expected,
DHODH inhibition prevents de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis,
which appears to be a particularly important pathway in the
growth/survival of KRAS mutant cells. DHODH inhibition also
substantially decreases cellular levels of glutamine and glutamate,
suggesting a connection to the previously established
glutamine dependence of KRAS mutant cells (Son et al., 2013;
Weinberg et al., 2010). We also show that brequinar, a DHODH
inhibitor that has previously failed to demonstrate efficacy in clinical
trials as an anticancer agent (Moore et al., 1993), exhibits

Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717, June 21, 2018 ª 2018 Elsevier Ltd. 705
strong in vivo antitumor activity in a KRAS mutant pancreatic tumor
xenograft model. The links observed in vitro between KRAS
status and a requirement for metabolic flux through the de novo
pyrimidine biosynthetic pathway suggest new strategies for the
clinical application of potent DHODH inhibitors against KRAS
mutant cancers.

RESULTS

KRAS Dependency of Cell Lines Used for Screening
The panel of cell lines for screening was selected based on the
dependence of growth and viability on mutant KRAS status.
Because of the important contribution of oncogenic KRAS
signaling to robust anchorage-independent growth (Campbell
et al., 2007; Guerrero et al., 2000), we assessed the KRAS
dependence of cell lines based on the impact of KRAS knockdown
in a soft agar clonogenic growth assay. KRAS mutant
cell lines showing a reduction in growth upon KRAS knockdown
greater than 50% were designated as KRAS-dependent, while

KRAS-independent cell lines were defined as those in which
KRAS knockdown had no significant effect (Figure 1A).
In testing growth conditions, we discovered that culturing cells
in soft agar (3D culture) had a dramatic effect on their sensitivity
to inhibition of Ras-MEK-ERK signaling. Cells cultured in 3D
exhibited a half maximal inhibitory concentration (IC50) for the
MEK inhibitor pimasertib that was approximately two orders of
magnitude less than the same cells cultured on plastic (2D culture)
(Figure 1B). Since 3D culture is likely to be a more faithful
model for tumors in vivo, these conditions were chosen for
screening.
An additional important consideration in selecting cell lines
was finding KRAS WT cell lines with 3D growth capacity and kinetics
comparable to KRAS mutant cell lines. Based on the
criteria of KRAS dependence and growth rate, we selected
a panel that included six KRAS-dependent and four KRASindependent
cell lines (Figure 1C). All the KRAS-independent
cell lines chosen had WT KRAS genes. Notably, one cell
line (H1299) presented an activating mutation of NRAS, which

Figure 1. Determination of KRAS Dependence for a Panel of Cell Lines Cultured in 3D
(A) RNAi knockdown of KRAS impairs growth and viability of HCT116 (mutant KRAS) cells in 3D culture, but SK-OV-3 (KRAS WT) cells are not affected. Nontargeted
(NT) shRNA was used as a negative control. Dox, doxycycline; RFU, relative fluorescence units.
(B) KP-4 cells (KRAS mutant) in 3D culture (circles) are more sensitive to a MEK inhibitor (pimasertib) than the same cells in 2D culture (squares).
(C) Panel of validated mutant KRAS-dependent and -independent cell lines.
Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. See also Figures S1 and S2. EGFR, epidermal growth factor receptor.

706 Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717, June 21, 2018
provided a unique control for the distinct oncogenic impact of
mutant KRAS relative to other Ras isoforms.

A Screen for Small Molecules with Selective Cytotoxicity

toward KRAS Mutant Cell Lines
The chosen cell lines were used in a high-throughput screen of
a 280,000-compound chemical library (Figure S1). Following an
initial primary screen for effects on viability in five KRAS mutant
lines, a KRAS WT line was added to the panel, and actives
were confirmed and tested for KRAS mutant selectivity. The
list of active compounds was filtered to remove frequent hitters
and other compounds known to be problematic in highthroughput
screens. Potency of cell growth inhibition (IC50)
against the five KRAS mutant lines/one KRAS WT line was
measured for confirmed actives of interest, and compounds
were chosen for further analysis based on their selectivity for
mutant lines.
To find compounds with high selectivity for KRAS mutant
lines, potencies and efficacies were plotted (Figure S2). The
molecules exhibiting both high potency and high efficacy
were selected. The list was further curated by removing promiscuous
and/or chemically intractable compounds, leaving a total
of 277 compounds. Those were tested against an expanded
panel of six KRAS mutant and four KRAS WT cell lines. Based
on their differential activities against mutant and WT lines in
this broader panel, the compounds were divided into tiers
(Figure S2B).
The compounds exhibiting high potency and KRAS-selectivity
came from a number of chemical series. As expected, a MEK inhibitor,
PD-0325901, was one of the most selective inhibitors of
KRAS mutant lines. It showed activity against all six KRAS
mutant lines, but was only active against one WT line. However,
the most potent and KRAS mutant-selective compounds belonged
to another series, based on a thiazolimine scaffold. Active
members of this series were chosen for characterization in a second
screen against a large cancer cell line panel.
Because of the difficulty of screening a larger cell line panel in
the 3D format (the automated work stream used for large-scale
screening was customized for 2D cultures and many WT lines
failed to grow robustly in 3D culture), only the thiazolimine series
was tested against this panel of lines (374 diverse cancer cell
lines characterized with respect to genetic mutations, copy
number variations, and mRNA expression levels) in 2D culture.
An analysis of the results (Figure 2A) showed that the thiazolimines
were among the most KRAS mutant-selective agents
tested; the KRAS mutant lines in the panel were, on average,
more sensitive to the thiazolimines, and this selectivity was
comparable to that observed for the MEK inhibitor pimasertib.
In a complementary analysis, the known mutations in the cell
line panel were examined to determine which were most highly
enriched among cell lines that responded to the thiazolimine
compound 1 (Table S1). This analysis showed that KRAS was
the gene in which mutations were most strongly associated
with sensitivity to the compound (Figure 2B). In addition, many
lung and pancreatic cell lines in the panel were sensitive to
compound 1, while cell lines from tissues of origin where
KRAS mutation is less prevalent tended to be less sensitive to
it (Figure 2C), consistent with a substantial effect of the KRAS
mutation on differential sensitivity. These data thus suggest

that the thiazolimines inhibit a pathway required for survival of
KRAS mutant cell lines.

Chemoproteomic Discovery of Potential Targets of the

Thiazolimine Series

Based on the promising results from the synthetic lethal screen
and the cell line profiling, the thiazolimine series was chosen for
compound deorphaning via a chemoproteomics approach. For
this chemoproteomics approach, it was judged likely that, for
cells that exhibited thiazolimine sensitivity in both 2D and 3D culture,
the specific molecular target of the thiazolimine series would
be the same in both culture systems, although the details of the
phenotypic consequences of target inhibition might differ. In order
to build a solid-supported affinity reagent for use in protein
target pull-downs, the lead thiazolimine was functionalized with
a short amine-terminated linker at various positions. Compound
14, in which a phenol group was O-alkylated with the linker, retained
activity in DLD-1 and KP-4 cells, thus validating the phenol
moiety as a suitable attachment point for the solid support.
Based on these results, an affinity reagent (compound 18), in
which 14 was attached to Sepharose beads, was prepared.
A SILAC-based (Mann, 2006) strategy was used to identify
proteins that bind specifically to the thiazolimine-derivatized
solid support (Figure 3A). To provide labeled proteome samples
for affinity pull-downs, KP-4 cells were grown in either 2D or 3D
cell culture using media containing amino acids with either a light
or heavy stable isotope label. In the first of three related experiments,
SILAC pull-downs were performed at two concentrations
of the active competitor compound 2 (13 or 203 its half maximal
effective concentration [EC50]; Table S1), comparing the pulldown
efficiency in the presence of the competitor to the efficiency
in the presence of DMSO as a control (Figure 3B).
Dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH; Uniprot ID PYRD)
was among the proteins most highly differentially competed
from the affinity matrix. DHODH was identified from multiple
peptides in the SILAC experiments. The SILAC ratios observed
were qualitatively dependent on the concentration of competitor
compound 2. These observations are consistent with a specific
interaction between DHODH and the affinity reagent-derivatized
support.
In a second experiment, a four-plex tandem mass tag pulldown
experiment on 2D-cultured KP-4 cells was used to quantify
the dose-response trend observed in the SILAC experiment.
The decrease in DHODH affinity pull-down correlated well with
the concentration of free competitor compound 2 (Figure 3C).
That observation further supports the hypothesis that DHODH
binds specifically to the derivatized solid support.
A third experiment was designed to determine whether
DHODH would also exhibit affinity for a biologically inactive homolog
of the active thiazolimine compound 2. Both the active
compound 2 and its close analog 3 (Table S1), which does not
inhibit KP-4 cell growth, were used as competitors in a SILAC
experiment. The results of this experiment (Figure 3D) show
that DHODH was selectively competed off the affinity matrix by
2 relative to 3. This observation suggests that within the thiazolimine
series, bioactivity against KP-4 cells is associated with
binding affinity for DHODH. It is consistent with the hypothesis
that the thiazolimine series exerts its effect on cell growth by inhibiting
DHODH.

Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717, June 21, 2018 707
Mechanistic Validation of the DHODH Target Hypothesis

To determine whether binding of the thiazolimines inhibits
DHODH’s enzymatic activity, we investigated the inhibitory potency
of a number of thiazolimines against purified recombinant
DHODH. The tested compounds were highly potent on average
(a median IC50 of 11 nM), with the more potent members of the
series being comparably potent to brequinar, a previously characterized
DHODH inhibitor with an IC50 of 5–10 nM (Chen et al.,
1992; McLean et al., 2001). These results indicate that the thiazolimines
bind to DHODH in a mode that prevents enzymatic
catalysis.
We next investigated whether the compounds’ DHODH inhibitory
potencies were correlated with their potencies for cell
growth inhibition (Figure 4A). Here, the issue of biological differences
between 2D and 3D cultures becomes relevant; however,
by choosing cells that exhibit a growth/survival phenotype in 2D
culture, we can correlate DHODH inhibition with cellular phenotype
in a 2D system where the phenotype is similar to what is
observed in 3D cultures. A correlation analysis reveals a
Spearman’s coefficient of 0.76 between these two potencies
(p = 1 3 103
), consistent with the hypothesis that DHODH inhibition
is a key driver of cellular potency. However, there is a substantial
(100-fold) shift toward lower potency when comparing
the biochemical with the cellular assay (e.g., compounds with
10 nM IC50 values in the biochemical assay exhibit IC50 values
of 1 mM in the cellular assay).
As an additional and more direct test of whether the thiazolimines
also potently inhibit DHODH in a cellular context, a

Figure 2. Phenotypic Profiling of Chemical Hit Series across a Large Cancer Cell Line Panel Identifies One Hit Series as Highly Selective for
KRAS Mutant Cell Lines
(A) Compounds from the thiazolimine series are among the most selective for KRAS mutant cell lines. Statistical significance is plotted as a function of selectivity,
as expressed as the ratio of average potency against KRAS WT/KRAS mutant lines.
(B) KRAS mutation status is the best predictor of cell sensitivity to the thiazolimine series among the mutations represented. Statistical significance is plotted
against mutant/WT differential sensitivity to thiazolimine compound 1.
(C) Compound 1 (red symbols) is highly potent against many pancreatic and lung cancer cell lines. Pimasertib (blue symbols) is plotted for comparison.

708 Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717, June 21, 2018
mass spectrometry-based pharmacodynamic (PD) assay for dihydroorotate
(DHO) was used to measure the accumulation of
this DHODH substrate in cells. The results (Figure 4B) show
that the thiazolimines’ potencies for cellular inhibition of DHODH
activity are highly correlated with their potencies for inhibition of
cell growth (Spearman’s coefficient of 0.96, p = 3 3 103
). These
data thus support the hypothesis that thiazolimines inhibit cell
growth in KRAS mutant cells by inhibiting DHODH enzymatic activity.
Biochemical and cellular potencies are also reasonably
well-correlated for DHODH inhibitors from other chemotypes
(e.g., brequinar and analogs) (Figure S3A).
Dose-response relationships were measured in all three assays
(biochemical, cell PD, and cell viability) for representative
molecules in each series. The data (Figures 4C and S3B) indicate

that for all DHODH inhibitors examined, potencies in the three
assays are mutually correlated with each other (Spearman
coefficients of 0.7, 0.8, and 0.96 for biochemical/PD, biochemical/phenotypic,
and PD/phenotypic correlations, respectively).
Thus, on-target effects of DHODH enzyme inhibitors appear to
contribute to growth inhibition of KRAS mutant cells.
The hypothesis that the thiazolimines act via DHODH inhibition
suggests that supplementation with exogenous pyrimidines may
rescue cell growth inhibition. Treatment of cells with exogenous
uridine, which can complement deficits in de novo pyrimidine
biosynthesis (Connolly and Duley, 1999), was used to test this
prediction. As predicted, addition of uridine rescued cell growth
in thiazolimine-treated cells (Figure 4D). A similar rescue effect
was observed for cells treated with brequinar (Figure S4).

Figure 3. Chemoproteomic Deorphaning of the Thiazolimine Series Identifies DHODH (PYRD) as a Candidate Target for the Series
(A) Outline of SILAC experiments in which light/heavy isotopically labeled media encodes the presence of active/inactive compound (or vehicle).
(B) SILAC experiments in which active compound (compound 2) is used as a competitor at two concentrations (13 EC50 or 203 EC50). KP-4 cells were cultured in
2D (blue graphs, left-hand side) or 3D (red graphs, right-hand side).
(C) Quantitative dose-response relationship for a soluble competitor compound by iTRAQ.
(D) SILAC experiment to determine ratio of proteins competed by active (compound 2)/inactive (compound 3) free compound. Lysates from 2D cultures (blue
graph, left-hand side) or 3D cultures (red graph, right-hand side) were used.
See also Table S1.

Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717, June 21, 2018 709
Notably, the concentration of uridine required for complete
rescue (>100 mM) is greatly in excess of the normal physiological
serum concentration (5 mM; Connolly and Duley, 1999).

Mitochondrial Metabolic Effects and Other Cellular

Consequences of DHODH Inhibition

In addition to the role of DHODH in de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis,
its role in mitochondrial electron transport may also
contribute to these inhibitors’ effects.
To investigate whether DHODH inhibitors affect the mitochondrial
membrane potential, we measured mitochondrial potential
in KP-4 cells as a function of DHODH inhibitor dose (Figure 5A).
The results show that DHODH inhibitors from two distinct chemical
series potently and dose-dependently induce mitochondrial
depolarization. The MEK inhibitor pimasertib, which also inhibits
KP-4 cell growth, does not affect mitochondrial membrane
potential. In addition to the inactive compound 3, teriflunomide,
which is a much less potent DHODH inhibitor than brequinar
(Davis et al., 1996; Erra et al., 2011; McLean et al., 2001) or the
best thiazolimine compounds, also has a minimal effect on mitochondrial
membrane potential (data not shown). These results
suggest that mitochondrial depolarization may contribute to
the effects of potent DHODH inhibitors in cells.
Inhibition of DHODH might also affect steady-state metabolite
levels, since glutamine is a starting metabolite for de novo pyrimidine
biosynthesis and DHODH is also linked to the citric acid cycle
via its role in mitochondrial electron transport. For these
detailed metabolomics experiments and subsequent in vivo
experiments, we chose to use brequinar rather than a thiazolimine
compound due to the extensive previous preclinical and
clinical characterization of brequinar as a DHODH inhibitor.
Mass spectrometric analysis indicates that treatment with
brequinar perturbs the levels of a number of metabolites (Figures
5B and S5). In KP-4 cells at the 24-hr time point after drug
treatment, the effects include increases in the levels of malate,

Figure 4. Validation of DHODH as a Biologically
Relevant Target for the Thiazolimine
Series in a KRAS Mutant Cell Line
(A) Correlation of IC50 in the biochemical assay with
EC50 in the cell growth inhibition assay (values
expressed as the logarithm).
(B) Correlation of EC50 in the pharmacodynamic
(PD) assay with EC50 in the cell growth inhibition
assay.
(C) Correlation of biochemical IC50, PD EC50, and
cell growth inhibition EC50.
(D) Dose-dependent rescue of compound
2-induced cell growth inhibition by uridine. Blue
symbols: thiazolimine dose-response in the
absence of uridine. Red symbols: 100 mM uridine.
Green symbols, 500 mM uridine.
Error bars represent the standard error of the
mean. See also Figures S3 and S4.

fumarate, and aspartate, and decreases
in the levels of glutamate, succinate, and
aKG. Brequinar also induces a substantial
dose-dependent decrease in the steadystate
level of glutamine (Figure 5B); a
comparable but more potent decrease is observed using
compound 2.
To further investigate how DHODH inhibition might differentially
affect KRAS WT and mutant cells, we carried out metabolomics
experiments to compare the effects of brequinar on KRAS
WT and mutant DLD-1 cells, as well as to compare metabolite
levels between the WT and mutant cells in the absence of drug
(Figures S6 and S7). Consistent with results in other cell lines,
the mutant DLD-1 cells exhibited a greater response to brequinar
and compound 2 than otherwise isogenic cells containing the WT
allele (Figure S6). In the KRAS mutant DLD-1 cells at the 4-hr time
point after drug treatment (i.e., before effects on cell viability are
observed), the effects include an increase in the steady-state
concentrations of fructose 1,6-bisphosphate; this increase is
not observed in the WT cell line (Figure S7). In addition, the flux
of glutamate (as judged by the change in isotopic incorporation
from 13C-glutamine) increases in response to brequinar treatment,
both for KRAS mutant and KRAS WT cells. In KRAS mutant
cells, brequinar treatment is also associated with a large increase
in AMP and ADP concentrations and a concomitant decrease
in the concentration of ATP, indicative of energy stress. In
contrast, brequinar treatment of KRAS WT cells leads to at
most a modest increase in AMP and ADP, with an increase in
ATP observed as well, suggesting that the mutant cells are differentially
sensitive to energy stress induced by DHODH inhibition.
DHODH inhibition does not affect the ratio of reduced/oxidized
glutathione at the 4-hr time point, but, consistent with previous
studies (Yun et al., 2015), the reduced/oxidized glutathione ratio
is markedly smaller in KRAS mutant than KRAS WT cells.
In addition to perturbing metabolite levels, DHODH inhibition
also induces cell-cycle arrest. Flow cytometric analysis of
cellular DNA content after treatment of KP-4 cells with compound
2 (Figures 5C and S8) indicates that the cells become
arrested in S phase. Inhibition of pyrimidine metabolism and/or
other metabolic perturbations may mediate this cell-cycle arrest.

710 Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717, June 21, 2018
In Vivo Antitumor Activity of a DHODH Inhibitor
Although DHODH inhibition has well-defined effects on cancer
cells in vitro, the potential availability of metabolites from other
tissues in vivo might limit the applicability of the in vitro findings.
To address this issue, we carried out in vivo studies of the effects
of brequinar on xenografts of KP-4 cells. Measurements of
metabolite concentration in the tumors (Figure 6A) establish
that the DHODH substrate dihydroorotate (DHO) in the tumor
builds up following accumulation of brequinar, consistent with
in vivo target engagement. Similarly, measurement of the pyrimidine
biosynthesis product uridine as an additional PD marker
(Figure 6B) indicates that it becomes depleted. In addition, as
observed in vitro, glutamine was depleted in the tumor after brequinar
treatment (Figure 6C).
In addition to demonstrating target engagement, the xenograft
studies also indicate that brequinar suppresses tumor growth
in vivo in a dose-dependent fashion (Figure 6D). Consistent
with previous reports (Moore et al., 1993; Peters et al., 1990,
1992), brequinar also exhibits dose-dependent toxicity as
measured by body weight loss in treated mice (Figure 6E); at
the 30 mg/kg dose, this body weight loss was large enough to
require termination of that arm of the study. However, at the

3 mg/kg and 10 mg/kg doses that supported substantial tumor
growth inhibition, body weight loss was minimal (at 3 mg/kg) or
transient (at 10 mg/kg) over the course of the study, defining a
therapeutic window for dosing in this system.

Synergistic Combinations of a DHODH Inhibitor with

Other Drugs

Because DHODH inhibitors have already been clinically tested
without demonstrating efficacy (Moore et al., 1993; Peters
et al., 1992), we investigated whether brequinar (the DHODH
inhibitor for which the most clinical data is available) might
exhibit greater efficacy in vitro in combination with another
drug. A set of 23 potential enhancer compounds with known
mechanisms of action was chosen based on previous
screening results against KRAS mutant cells and on an
assessment of whether the compounds’ mechanisms of action
were likely to synergize with DHODH inhibition. These compounds
were screened against KP-4 cells in a 12 3 12 dose
matrix with brequinar (in 2D culture) to test for synergistic
response.
The combination screen identified a number of drugs that synergize
with brequinar in vitro (Figures 7A and 7B) using at least

Figure 5. Effects of DHODH Inhibition on Cellular Metabolism and the Cell Cycle
(A) Potent DHODH inhibitors induce mitochondrial depolarization in KP-4 cells. Magenta symbols: compound 2; green symbols, brequinar; orange symbols,
pimasertib; black symbols, inactive thiazolimine (compound 3).
(B) DHODH inhibitors (inactive thiazolimine 3, active thiazolimine 2, and brequinar) decrease cellular levels of glutamine.
(C) Treatment of KP-4 cells with thiazolimine compound 2 for 24–48 hr induces arrest in S phase. DNA content was quantified using propidium iodide. Pink
histogram: cells treated with compound 2. Blue histogram: DMSO-treated cells.
Error bars represent the standard error of the mean. See also Figures S5–S8.

Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717, June 21, 2018 711
one standard criterion (Loewe [Chou and Talalay, 1984] and/or
HSA [Berenbaum, 1989] drug synergy scores; none of the
drugs listed scored as synergistic using the Bliss synergy score
[Bliss, 1939]). Notably, two of these (floxuridine, gemcitabine) act
directly on enzymes involved in pyrimidine nucleotide biosynthesis,
and a third (everolimus) is expected to affect pyrimidine
biosynthesis indirectly (Ben-Sahra et al., 2013; Robitaille
et al., 2013).
Because glutamate is a product of de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis,
inhibiting pyrimidine biosynthesis may affect the steadystate
glutamate concentration. Experimentally, brequinar as a
single agent induces a decrease in steady-state glutamate concentration
that, surprisingly, is comparable to the effect of an inhibitor
of GLS1, a major contributor to glutamate flux in many
cancer cells (Figure 7C). The combination of a GLS1 inhibitor,
compound 4 (Table S1) (Gross et al., 2014), with brequinar
was observed to decrease glutamate in KP-4 cells to lower
levels than observed for equivalent concentrations of either
agent individually (Figure 7C); however, it is not yet known
whether this effect is due to additivity or synergism between
the two agents. No synergistic effect on cell growth was
observed for 4; however, preliminary results indicate that a

second-generation GLS1 inhibitor exhibits strong synergy with
brequinar (data not shown).

DISCUSSION

The current study integrates results from both a new screen in 3D
culture and more conventional screens in 2D culture. Screening
in 3D culture has the advantage of sensitizing KRAS mutant cells
to Raf-MEK-ERK pathway inhibition (Figure 1D), so that the phenotypes
observed may be more directly translatable to in vivo
systems. Empirically, primary screening in 3D culture enabled
the discovery of KRAS synthetic lethal mechanisms that had
not previously been reported. However, screening in large
numbers of different cell lines proved to be more technically tractable
for 2D cell cultures. While results from both kinds of
screens were broadly consistent with each other, responses of
2D-cultured lines to synthetic lethal perturbation varied widely
(see, e.g., Figure 2A). These results suggest that 3D culture systems
are useful for studying KRAS mutant phenotypes, and that
results from small numbers of cell lines cultured in 2D may or may
not be predictive of results from 3D cultures and/or in vivo
biology.

Figure 6. Brequinar Exhibits an Antitumor Effect In Vivo Against KP-4 Xenograft Tumors
(A) Accumulation of DHODH substrate DHO in tumors is correlated with the concentration of brequinar in the tumor.
(B) Accumulation of DHO is correlated with depletion of uridine in vivo. Uridine concentration is presented in a.u. corresponding to ion counts from mass
spectrometry.
(C) Depletion of tumor glutamine is associated with brequinar treatment and occurs with a time course similar to uridine depletion.
(D) Brequinar suppresses the growth of KP-4 xenografts. Po, by mouth; qd, every day.
(E) Brequinar exhibits a therapeutic window in the KP-4 xenograft model.
Error bars represent the standard error of the mean.

712 Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717, June 21, 2018
The primary finding of the current work is that KRAS mutant
cells exhibit a synthetic lethal sensitivity to inhibitors of DHODH.
However, it is clear that inhibition of DHODH has pleiotropic effects
in cancer cells. Multiple downstream consequences of
DHODH inhibition may thus contribute to the selective effect of
DHODH inhibitors.
Results in cells and in vivo (Figures 5, 6A, and 6B) indicate that,
as expected, DHODH inhibition leads to decreased flux through
the de novo pyrimidine biosynthetic pathway. In addition, cell
growth inhibition by DHODH inhibitors is rescued by uridine (Figure
4D), suggesting that inhibition of de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis
contributes to cytotoxicity. The latter observation further
suggests that de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis is required for
growth and survival in KRAS mutant cells.
Previous studies have also linked Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK signaling
with increased de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis. Decreased
expression of an inducible mutant KRAS downregulates pyrimidine
biosynthetic genes at the transcriptional level (Ying et al.,
2012). In addition, MAPK signaling abolishes feedback inhibition
of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase, which catalyzes the ratelimiting
step in de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis (Graves et al.,
2000). Notably, glutamine deprivation in KRAS-driven cancer
cell lines has recently been shown to interfere with deoxynucleotide
biosynthesis, leading to S-phase arrest and replicative stress

(Patel et al., 2016). Deprivation of pyrimidine nucleotides is thus
likely to be a major contributor to the differential effect of DHODH
inhibitors on cell viability in KRAS mutant cell lines.
Mitochondrial depolarization induced by DHODH inhibition
(Figure 5A) may also contribute to the selective effects of
DHODH inhibitors on KRAS mutant cells. If so, the effect may
arise more from pro-apoptotic effects of mitochondrial depolarization
(Lemasters et al., 1998) than from impaired oxidative
phosphorylation. Oncogenic KRAS mutations have been associated
with decreased, rather than increased, oxidative phosphorylation:
expression of mutant KRAS leads to an increased
dependence on anabolic glucose metabolism (Weinberg et al.,
2010; Ying et al., 2012), while ablation of mutant KRAS leads
to an increased dependence on oxidative phosphorylation (Viale
et al., 2014). However, to the extent that KRAS mutant cells
exhibit enhanced flux through de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis,
they may also exhibit a greater dependence on electron transport
through DHODH to maintain consistently hyperpolarized
mitochondrial membrane potentials and a pro-survival phenotype.
A precedent for an association between hyperpolarized
mitochondrial potentials and a pro-survival phenotype can be
found in the example of CD8+ memory T cells, for which surplus
capacity for oxidative phosphorylation enhances cellular survival
(van der Windt et al., 2012).

Figure 7. Screening for Agents That Synergize with a DHODH Inhibitor
(A) Plot of statistical significance (adjusted false discovery rate, FDR) versus HSA synergy score.
(B) Compounds exhibiting significant synergy as judged by two different synergy scores (Loewe and HSA). mTOR, mammalian target of rapamycin.
(C) The combination of brequinar sodium and a GLS1 inhibitor (compound 4) decreases steady-state levels of glutamate in KP-4 cells to a greater extent than
either compound alone. Glutamate is quantified as intensity of MS signal (ion counts). Error bars represent the standard error of the mean.

Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717, June 21, 2018 713
Measurements of metabolite levels in the current study are
also consistent with the idea that KRAS mutant cells are differentially
dependent on mitochondrial electron transport via DHODH,
which may contribute to differential effects of DHODH inhibition.
In KRAS mutant cells, brequinar treatment is associated with energy
stress (Figure S7). However, brequinar does not induce
similar energy stress in WT cells. Taken together, these data support
the hypothesis that KRAS mutant cells are differentially
dependent on flux through DHODH for survival, due in part to
its role in primary energy metabolism. One possibility is that in
KRAS mutant cells, increased electron transport via DHODH
partially compensates for decreased electron transport via aerobic
glucose metabolism.
In addition to a role for DHODH inhibition in primary energy
metabolism, the observation of decreased steady-state levels
of glutamine and glutamate and increased isotopic exchange
into glutamate (a proxy for metabolic flux) upon treatment with
a DHODH inhibitor (Figures 5C, 6C, 7G, S5, and S7) suggests
a link between DHODH activity and glutamine metabolism,
which was previously demonstrated to be crucial for the growth
and survival of KRAS mutant cancer cells (Son et al., 2013; Weinberg
et al., 2010). These observations, as well as the increased
steady-state level of aspartate observed upon DHODH inhibition,
are consistent with increased conversion of glutamine and
oxaloacetate to aKG and aspartate via GOT1. Therefore, the
decreased steady-state levels of glutamine appear not to be
caused by a lack of available glutamine as a metabolic substrate,
but rather by increased consumption of glutamine.
Since the decrease in glutamine levels appears to be associated
with increased glutaminolysis rather than a decreased ability
to accumulate glutamine, it might be hypothesized that this
decrease in glutamine levels does not contribute to impaired
growth and survival in KRAS mutant cells. However, the observation
that uridine rescues both the effect of brequinar on glutamate
flux and its cellular phenotypic effect suggests that the
metabolic effects of DHODH do contribute to its broader biological
effects. In addition, the results are consistent with synergism
between GLS1 inhibition and DHODH inhibition both at the level
of regulating glutamine levels and (at least for some GLS1 inhibitors)
at the level of growth and survival. One hypothesis that accounts
for the current observations is that DHODH activity helps
to mediate the balance between two distinct glutaminolysisdependent
redox metabolic pathways that have been implicated
in growth/survival in KRAS mutant cells: generation of
mitochondrial reactive oxygen species (ROS) (Weinberg et al.,
2010) and flux through GOT1 enabling generation of NADPH
and maintenance of reduced glutathione (Son et al., 2013; Yun
et al., 2015).
Electron transport via DHODH activity will allow the generation
of mitochondrial ROS without the consumption of a-ketoglutarate
or NADH. Glutamine-dependent flux through the TCA cycle
and oxidative phosphorylation can also enable generation of
mitochondrial ROS (Weinberg et al., 2010). The latter process
requires partitioning of aKG derived from glutamine into the
TCA cycle to generate reducing equivalents in the form of
NADH, leading ultimately to reduction of molecular oxygen by
Complex III to generate ROS (Weinberg et al., 2010). However,
since production of NADPH via GOT1/MDH1/ME1 (Son et al.,
2013; Yun et al., 2015) also requires consumption of aKG and

NADH, these metabolites must partition between the two prosurvival
pathways. DHODH activity may thus be required to
enable high flux through both of these pathways simultaneously.
KRAS mutant cells, unlike WT cells, also exhibit a large brequinar-mediated
increase in fructose-1,6-bisphosphate levels
(Figure S7). However, there does not appear to be a clear mechanism
for DHODH inhibition to mediate this effect directly. One
possibility is that developing arrest of the cells in S phase leads
to upregulation of glycolytic flux (Kaplon et al., 2015) and an increase
in fructose-1,6-bisphosphate (which is downstream of
the rate-limiting enzymes in this pathway). In that case, the upregulation
of glycolytic flux would appear to be mostly through the
anaerobic (lactic acid) branch of the pathway; brequinar treatment
is associated with a decrease in the steady-state level of
citrate without a concomitant decrease of isotopic exchange
into this metabolite (Figure S7), suggesting a decreased flux of
metabolites into the citric acid cycle.
The relative functional importance of DHODH’s pyrimidine
biosynthetic, energy-producing, and redox-modulating functions
is likely to depend on cellular context. DHODH has previously
been characterized as a synthetic lethal target in several
different oncogenic cell contexts, including the BRAF V600E mutation
(White et al., 2011), PTEN deficiency (Mathur et al., 2017),
and triple-negative breast cancer cell lines (Brown et al., 2017). In
the case of the BRAF V600E mutation, oncogenic mutations of
both BRAF and KRAS are gain-of-function with respect to the
Ras-Raf-MEK-ERK pathway, which may account for the shared
phenotype with respect to DHODH inhibition. However, KRAS
signaling affects multiple signaling pathways in addition to RafMEK-ERK,
so, in general, interventions that affect KRAS mutant
cells may or may not affect BRAF mutant cells. Recently, de novo
pyrimidine metabolism through carbamoyl phosphate generated
in the urea cycle has been shown to be important for growth/survival
in the KRAS/LKB1 double-mutant context (Kim et al., 2017),
suggesting that DHODH inhibition might be useful specifically in
this cellular context as well.
The in vitro and in vivo results presented here suggest that
DHODH inhibition may be clinically useful in the treatment of
KRAS mutant tumors. However, in previous clinical trials, brequinar
failed to demonstrate efficacy in multiple tumor types,
including pancreatic and colorectal, a substantial fraction of
which almost certainly harbored KRAS mutations (Moore et al.,
1993; Peters et al., 1992). Understanding the basis for the
discrepancy between in vitro/in vivo models and clinical results
might enable the design of new and more effective clinical treatment
strategies.
One possible explanation for the lack of observed clinical
effectiveness for brequinar is that target engagement in the
clinical studies was insufficient to induce tumor cell death. In vivo
studies suggest that prolonged exposure to brequinar is
required to achieve the metabolite depletion effects required
for maximum efficacy (Dexter et al., 1985; Schwartsmann
et al., 1988). However, the clinical trials of brequinar were designed
following a traditional chemotherapeutic regimen, in
which the maximum tolerated dose was delivered, followed by
an intervening recovery period. Pharmacokinetic data from these
clinical trials (Arteaga et al., 1989) reveals that between doses,
the plasma drug concentrations dropped below the efficacy
threshold seen in our preclinical studies, and investigators in

714 Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717, June 21, 2018
the clinical studies speculated that maintaining effective drug
concentrations over a longer period of time might be required
to achieve clinical efficacy (Braakhuis et al., 1990).
Another potential approach to achieving clinical benefit from
DHODH inhibition would be to employ combination therapies.
The results reported here suggest that promising combination
candidates include floxuridine (an inhibitor of pyrimidine biosynthesis
via thymidylate synthase) and gemcitabine (an inhibitor of
ribonucleotide reductase), both of which also target nucleotide
metabolism. Gemcitabine is a particularly intriguing potential
combination partner because it is already in use as a first-line
therapy for pancreatic cancer. Results on GLS1 inhibitors suggest
that such agents might also be useful combination agents
for DHODH inhibitors, although highly potent GLS1 inhibitors
may be required for a synergistic effect to be observable at the
level of growth inhibition.
The current study provides evidence for a previously unknown
role for DHODH as a growth/survival factor in KRAS mutant tumors.
While many aspects of the link between DHODH inhibition
and survival of KRAS mutant cells remain to be established,
de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis appears to be a crucial pathway
for KRAS mutant cells. The connection between KRAS mutant
status and a requirement for DHODH enzymatic activity may
enable new therapeutic approaches for KRAS mutant cancers.

SIGNIFICANCE

A synthetic lethal screen for small molecules that selectively
inhibit the growth of KRAS mutant cell lines identifies inhibitors
of dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (DHODH) as potential
therapies for KRAS mutant cancers. An investigation of
the metabolic effects of these inhibitors on KRAS mutant
cell lines points to perturbation of primary energy metabolism
and glutamine metabolism as possible contributors
to the observed KRAS mutant selectivity. The results suggest
that alternative clinical trial designs for potent clinical-stage
DHODH inhibitors such as brequinar in KRAS
mutant cancers may be worth evaluating.

STAR+METHODS

Detailed methods are provided in the online version of this paper
and include the following:

d KEY RESOURCES TABLE
d CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING
d EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS
B In Vivo Animal Studies
B Cell Lines
d METHOD DETAILS
B Reagents
B Compound Screening in 3D Cultures
B KRAS Knockdown: shRNA Expression and Gene
Down-Regulation
B Cell Line Sensitivity Profiling
B Biochemical Pull-Down Experiment with ThiazolimineConjugated
Beads
B SDS/PAGE and In-Gel Digestion
B iTRAQ Labeling of the Digested Pull-Down Samples

B Mass Spectrometry Analysis and Data Interpretation
B DHODH Biochemical Assay
B Cell Cycle Analysis
B Mitochondrial Membrane Potential Assay
B LC-MS/MS Mass Spectrometric Metabolite Analysis of
Cells and Tumor Tissues
B CE-TOFMS Mass Spectrometric Metabolite Analysis
of Cells and Tumor Tissues
B Synergistic Combinations in KRAS Mutant Cell
Context
B General Synthetic Methods
B Synthetic Protocols
d QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

SUPPLEMENTAL INFORMATION

Supplemental Information includes seven figures and one table can be found
with this article online at https://doi.org/10.1016/j.chembiol.2018.03.005.

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

We thank Dr. Laura Shelton (Human Metabolome Technologies) for helpful discussions.
We thank Dr. Dietmar Hoffmann and the Sanofi Molecular Cloning
group for generation of inducible shRNA vectors for KRAS knockdown. We
thank Dr. Joern Hopke for microscopic image acquisition and analysis.

AUTHOR CONTRIBUTIONS

M.K., J.S., A.C., B.L., G.T., L.B., I.M., I.S, C.P., S.V., B.B., B.Z., T.H., Q.G., P.G,
D.S., M.P.C., R.T., M. Barrague, R.N., Y.W., F.S., J.M., E.Y., and D.H. designed
and carried out experiments. S.R., H.C., M.M., E.Y., and J.P. analyzed data. M.
Barrague, M. Bouaboula, J.P., C.G., C. G-E., H.C., F.A., C.W., S.L., I. C-T. R.A.,
and A.M. designed and interpreted experiments. M.K., J.S., B.Z., Q.G., D.S.,
R.N., S.L., and A.M. wrote the manuscript, with contributions from all other
authors.

DECLARATION OF INTERESTS

The authors are current or former employees and/or shareholders of Sanofi.

Received: November 23, 2016
Revised: December 29, 2017
Accepted: March 8, 2018
Published: April 5, 2018

REFERENCES

Arteaga, C.L., Brown, T.D., Kuhn, J.G., Shen, H.S., O’Rourke, T.J., Beougher,
K., Brentzel, H.J., Von Hoff, D.D., and Weiss, G.R. (1989). Phase I clinical and
pharmacokinetic trial of brequinar sodium (DuP 785; NSC 368390). Cancer
Res. 49, 4648–4653.
Bantscheff, M., Eberhard, D., Abraham, Y., Bastuck, S., Boesche, M., Hobson,
S., Mathieson, T., Perrin, J., Raida, M., Rau, C., et al. (2007). Quantitative
chemical proteomics reveals mechanisms of action of clinical ABL kinase inhibitors.
Nat. Biotechnol. 25, 1035–1044.
Barbie, D.A., Tamayo, P., Boehm, J.S., Kim, S.Y., Moody, S.E., Dunn, I.F.,
Schinzel, A.C., Sandy, P., Meylan, E., Scholl, C., et al. (2009). Systematic
RNA interference reveals that oncogenic KRAS-driven cancers require
TBK1. Nature 462, 108–112.
Bardeesy, N., and DePinho, R.A. (2002). Pancreatic cancer biology and genetics.
Nat. Rev. Cancer 2, 897–909.
Ben-Sahra, I., Howell, J.J., Asara, J.M., and Manning, B.D. (2013). Stimulation
of de novo pyrimidine synthesis by growth signaling through mTOR and S6K1.
Science 339, 1323–1328.
Berenbaum, M.C. (1989). What is synergy? Pharmacol. Rev. 41, 93–141.

Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717, June 21, 2018 715
Bliss, C.I. (1939). The toxicity of poisons applied jointly. Ann. Appl. Biol. 26,
585–615.

Braakhuis, B.J., van Dongen, G.A., Peters, G.J., van Walsum, M., and Snow,
G.B. (1990). Antitumor activity of brequinar sodium (Dup-785) against human
head and neck squamous cell carcinoma xenografts. Cancer Lett. 49,
133–137.
Brown, K.K., Spinelli, J.B., Asara, J.M., and Toker, A. (2017). Adaptive reprogramming
of de novo pyrimidine biosynthesis is a metabolic vulnerability in triple-negative
breast cancer. Cancer Discov. 7, 391–399.
Campbell, P.M., Groehler, A.L., Lee, K.M., Ouellette, M.M., Khazak, V., and
Der, C.J. (2007). K-Ras promotes growth transformation and invasion of
immortalized human pancreatic cells by Raf and phosphatidylinositol 3-kinase
signaling. Cancer Res. 67, 2098–2106.
Chen, S.F., Perrella, F.W., Behrens, D.L., and Papp, L.M. (1992). Inhibition of
dihydroorotate dehydrogenase activity by brequinar sodium. Cancer Res.
52, 3521–3527.
Chou, T.C., and Talalay, P. (1984). Quantitative analysis of dose-effect relationships:
the combined effects of multiple drugs or enzyme inhibitors. Adv.
Enzyme Regul. 22, 27–55.
Connolly, G.P., and Duley, J.A. (1999). Uridine and its nucleotides: biological
actions, therapeutic potentials. Trends Pharmacol. Sci. 20, 218–225.
Cox, A.D., Fesik, S.W., Kimmelman, A.C., Luo, J., and Der, C.J. (2014).
Drugging the undruggable RAS: mission possible? Nat. Rev. Drug Discov.
13, 828–851.
Davis, J.P., Cain, G.A., Pitts, W.J., Magolda, R.L., and Copeland, R.A. (1996).
The immunosuppressive metabolite of leflunomide is a potent inhibitor of human
dihydroorotate dehydrogenase. Biochemistry 35, 1270–1273.
Dexter, D.L., Hesson, D.P., Ardecky, R.J., Rao, G.V., Tippett, D.L., Dusak,
B.A., Paull, K.D., Plowman, J., DeLarco, B.M., Narayanan, V.L., et al. (1985).
Activity of a novel 4-quinolinecarboxylic acid, NSC 368390 [6-fluoro-2-(2’-fluoro-1,1’-biphenyl-4-yl)-3-methyl-4-quinolinecarb
oxylic acid sodium salt],
against experimental tumors. Cancer Res. 45, 5563–5568.
Erra, M., Moreno, I., Sanahuja, J., Andres, M., Reinoso, R.F., Lozoya, E.,
Pizcueta, P., Godessart, N., and Castro-Palomino, J.C. (2011). Biaryl analogues
of teriflunomide as potent DHODH inhibitors. Bioorg. Med. Chem.
Lett. 21, 7268–7272.
Graves, L.M., Guy, H.I., Kozlowski, P., Huang, M., Lazarowski, E., Pope, R.M.,
Collins, M.A., Dahlstrand, E.N., Earp, H.S., 3rd, and Evans, D.R. (2000).
Regulation of carbamoyl phosphate synthetase by MAP kinase. Nature 403,
328–332.
Gross, M.I., Demo, S.D., Dennison, J.B., Chen, L., Chernov-Rogan, T., Goyal,
B., Janes, J.R., Laidig, G.J., Lewis, E.R., Li, J., et al. (2014). Antitumor activity
of the glutaminase inhibtor CB-839 in triple-negative breast cancer. Mol.
Cancer Ther. 13, 890–901.
Guerrero, S., Casanova, I., Farre, L., Mazo, A., Capella, G., and Mangues, R.
(2000). K-ras codon 12 mutation induces higher level of resistance to
apoptosis and predisposition to anchorage-independent growth than codon
13 mutation or proto-oncogene overexpression. Cancer Res. 60, 6750–6756.
Hesson, D.P. (1987). 2-Phenyl-4-quinolinecarboxylic acids and pharmaceutical
compositions thereof. US patent US4680299A, filed July 14, 1987.
Hunter, J.C., Gurbani, D., Ficarro, S.B., Carrasco, M.A., Lim, S.M., Choi, H.G.,
Xie, T., Marto, J.A., Chen, Z., Gray, N.S., et al. (2014). In situ selectivity profiling
and crystal structure of SML-8-73-1, an active site inhibitor of oncogenic
K-Ras G12C. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 111, 8895–8900.
Kaplon, J., van Dam, L., and Peeper, D. (2015). Two-way communication between
the metabolic and cell cycle machineries: the molecular basis. Cell
Cycle 14, 2022–2032.
Kim, J., McMillan, E., Kim, H.S., Venkateswaran, N., Makkar, G., RodriguezCanales,
J., Villalobos, P., Neggers, J.E., Mendiratta, S., Wei, S., et al.
(2016). XPO1-dependent nuclear export is a druggable vulnerability in
KRAS-mutant lung cancer. Nature 538, 114–117.
Kim, J., Hu, Z., Cai, L., Li, K., Choi, E., Faubert, B., Bezwada, D., RodriguezCanales,
J., Villalobos, P., Lin, Y.F., et al. (2017). CPS1 maintains pyrimidine

pools and DNA synthesis in KRAS/LKB1 mutant lung cancer cells. Nature
546, 168–172.

Lemasters, J.J., Nieminen, A.L., Qian, T., Trost, L.C., Elmore, S.P., Nishimura,
Y., Crowe, R.A., Cascio, W.E., Bradham, C.A., Brenner, D.A., et al. (1998). The
mitochondrial permeability transition in cell death: a common mechanism in
necrosis, apoptosis and autophagy. Biochim. Biophys. Acta 1366, 177–196.
Linardou, H., Dahabreh, I.J., Kanaloupiti, D., Siannis, F., Bafaloukos, D.,
Kosmidis, P., Papadimitriou, C.A., and Murray, S. (2008). Assessment of somatic
k-RAS mutations as a mechanism associated with resistance to
EGFR-targeted agents: a systematic review and meta-analysis of studies in
advanced non-small-cell lung cancer and metastatic colorectal cancer.
Lancet Oncol. 9, 962–972.
Luo, J., Emanuele, M.J., Li, D., Creighton, C.J., Schlabach, M.R., Westbrook,
T.F., Wong, K.K., and Elledge, S.J. (2009). A genome-wide RNAi screen identifies
multiple synthetic lethal interactions with the Ras oncogene. Cell 137,
835–848.
Mann, M. (2006). Functional and quantitative proteomics using SILAC. Nat.
Rev. Mol. Cell Biol. 7, 952–958.
Mathur, D., Stratikopoulos, E., Ozturk, S., Steinbach, N., Pegno, S.,
Schoenfeld, S., Yong, R., Murty, V.V., Asara, J.M., Cantley, L.C., and
Parsons, R. (2017). PTEN regulates glutamine flux to pyrimidine synthesis
and sensitivity to dihydroorotate dehydrogenase inhibition. Cancer Discov.
7, 380–390.
McLean, J.E., Neidhardt, E.A., Grossman, T.H., and Hedstrom, L. (2001).
Multiple inhibitor analysis of the brequinar and leflunomide binding sites on human
dihydroorotate dehydrogenase. Biochemistry 40, 2194–2200.
Moore, M., Maroun, J., Robert, F., Natale, R., Neidhart, J., Dallaire, B., Sisk, R.,
and Gyves, J. (1993). Multicenter phase II study of brequinar sodium in patients
with advanced gastrointestinal cancer. Invest. New Drugs 11, 61–65.
Ostrem, J.M., Peters, U., Sos, M.L., Wells, J.A., and Shokat, K.M. (2013).
K-Ras(G12C) inhibitors allosterically control GTP affinity and effector interactions.
Nature 503, 548–551.
Patel, D., Menon, D., Bernfeld, E., Mroz, V., Kalan, S., Loayza, D., and Foster,
D.A. (2016). Aspartate rescues S-phase arrest caused by suppression of
glutamine utilization in KRas-driven cancer cells. J. Biol. Chem. 291,
9322–9329.
Peters, G.J., Kraal, I., and Pinedo, H.M. (1992). In vitro and in vivo studies on
the combination of brequinar sodium (DUP-785; NSC 368390) with 5-fluorouracil;
effects of uridine. Br. J. Cancer 65, 229–233.
Peters, G.J., Schwartsmann, G., Nadal, J.C., Laurensse, E.J., van Groeningen,
C.J., van der Vijgh, W.J., and Pinedo, H.M. (1990). In vivo inhibition of the pyrimidine
de novo enzyme dihydroorotic acid dehydrogenase by brequinar sodium
(DUP-785; NSC 368390) in mice and patients. Cancer Res. 50,
4644–4649.
Robitaille, A.M., Christen, S., Shimobayashi, M., Cornu, M., Fava, L.L., Moes,
S., Prescianotto-Baschong, C., Sauer, U., Jenoe, P., and Hall, M.N. (2013).
Quantitative phosphoproteomics reveal mTORC1 activates de novo pyrimidine
synthesis. Science 339, 1320–1323.
Scholl, C., Frohling, S., Dunn, I.F., Schinzel, A.C., Barbie, D.A., Kim, S.Y.,
Silver, S.J., Tamayo, P., Wadlow, R.C., Ramaswamy, S., et al. (2009).
Synthetic lethal interaction between oncogenic KRAS dependency and
STK33 suppression in human cancer cells. Cell 137, 821–834.
Schwartsmann, G., Peters, G.J., Laurensse, E., de Waal, F.C., Loonen, A.H.,
Leyva, A., and Pinedo, H.M. (1988). DUP 785 (NSC 368390): schedule-dependency
of growth-inhibitory and antipyrimidine effects. Biochem. Pharmacol.
37, 3257–3266.
Shaw, A.T., Winslow, M.M., Magendantz, M., Ouyang, C., Dowdle, J.,
Subramanian, A., Lewis, T.A., Maglathin, R.L., Tolliday, N., and Jacks, T.
(2011). Selective killing of K-ras mutant cancer cells by small molecule inducers
of oxidative stress. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 108, 8773–8778.
Son, J., Lyssiotis, C.A., Ying, H., Wang, X., Hua, S., Ligorio, M., Perera, R.M.,
Ferrone, C.R., Mullarky, E., Shyh-Chang, N., et al. (2013). Glutamine supports
pancreatic cancer growth through a KRAS-regulated metabolic pathway.
Nature 496, 101–105.

716 Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717, June 21, 2018
Steckel, M., Molina-Arcas, M., Weigelt, B., Marani, M., Warne, P.H.,
Kuznetsov, H., Kelly, G., Saunders, B., Howell, M., Downward, J., et al.
(2012). Determination of synthetic lethal interactions in KRAS oncogenedependent
cancer cells reveals novel therapeutic targeting strategies. Cell
Res. 22, 1227–1245.
Sun, Q., Burke, J.P., Phan, J., Burns, M.C., Olejniczak, E.T., Waterson, A.G.,
Lee, T., Rossanese, O.W., and Fesik, S.W. (2012). Discovery of small molecules
that bind to K-Ras and inhibit Sos-mediated activation. Angew. Chem.
Int. Ed. 51, 6140–6143.
van der Windt, G.J.W., Everts, B., Chang, C.-H., Curtis, J.D., Freitas, T.C.,
Amiel, E., Pearce, E.J., and Pearce, E.L. (2012). Mitochondrial respiratory capacity
is a critical regulator of CD8+ T cell memory development. Immunity
36, 68–78.
Viale, A., Pettazzoni, P., Lyssiotis, C.A., Ying, H., Sanchez, N., Marchesini, M.,
Carugo, A., Green, T., Seth, S., Giuliani, V., et al. (2014). Oncogene ablationresistant
pancreatic cancer cells depend on mitochondrial function. Nature
514, 628–632.

Weinberg, F., Hamanaka, R., Wheaton, W.W., Weinberg, S., Joseph, J.,
Lopez, M., Kalyanaraman, B., Mutlu, G.M., Budinger, G.R., and Chandel,
N.S. (2010). Mitochondrial metabolism and ROS generation are essential for
Kras-mediated tumorigenicity. Proc. Natl. Acad. Sci. USA 107, 8788–8793.
White, R.M., Cech, J., Ratanasirintrawoot, S., Lin, C.Y., Rahl, P.B., Burke, C.J.,
Langdon, E., Tomlinson, M.L., Mosher, J., Kaufman, C., et al. (2011). DHODH
modulates transcriptional elongation in the neural crest and melanoma. Nature
471, 518–522.
Ying, H., Kimmelman, A.C., Lyssiotis, C.A., Hua, S., Chu, G.C., FletcherSananikone,
E., Locasale, J.W., Son, J., Zhang, H., Coloff, J.L., et al. (2012).
Oncogenic Kras maintains pancreatic tumors through regulation of anabolic
glucose metabolism. Cell 149, 656–670.
Yun, J., Mullarky, E., Lu, C., Bosch, K.N., Kavalier, A., Rivera, K., Roper, J.,
Chio, , II, Giannopoulou, E.G., Rago, C., et al. (2015). Vitamin C selectively kills
KRAS and BRAF mutant colorectal cancer cells by targeting GAPDH. Science
350, 1391–1396.

Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717, June 21, 2018 717
STAR+METHODS

KEY RESOURCES TABLE

REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER

Antibodies

Anti-Ras Antibody, clone RAS10 Millipore Sigma Cat#05-516; RRID: AB_11211664

Monoclonal Anti-b-Actin Millipore Sigma Cat#A5316; RRID: AB_476743

Chemicals, Peptides, and Recombinant Proteins

Recombinant DHODH Creative Biomart Cat#DHODH-2486

PD0325901 MEK Inhibitor Selleck Chemicals Cat#S1036

Pimasertib (AS-703026) MEK Inhibitor Selleck Chemicals Cat#S1475

Brequinar Sanofi internal collection N/A

Teriflunomide Sanofi internal collection N/A

Floxuridine Selleck Chemicals Cat#S1299

Gemcitabine Selleck Chemicals Cat#S1149

Everolimus (RAD001) Selleck Chemicals Cat#S1120

Staurosporine Sigma Cat#62996-74-1

SeaPrep Agarose Lonza Cat#50302

Hoeschst 35480 Invitrogen Cat#H21486

MitoTracker Red Thermofisher Cat#M7512

Critical Commercial Assays

Trans-Lentiviral shRNA Packaging Kit Open Biosystems Cat#TLP5912

KRAS Taqman Gene Expression assay Thermofisher Cat#Hs00270666_m1
b Actin Taqman Gene Expression assay Thermofisher Cat#Hs01102345_m1
TaqMan Gene Expression Cells-to-CT Kit Thermofisher Cat#AM1729
iTRAQ
Reagents SCIEX iTRAQ
Reagents
Cell Titer Glo Promega Cat#G7570
Experimental Models: Cell Lines
KP-4 JCRB JCRB0182
DLD-1 ATCC ATCC CCL-221
PANC-1 ATCC ATCC CRL-1469
CFPAC-1 ATCC ATCC CRL-1918
HCT116 ATCC ATCC CCL-247
MIA PaCa-2 ATCC ATCC CRL-1420
H1299 ATCC ATCC CRL-5803
UISO-BCA-1 Southern Research Institute CVCL_D249
ACHN ATCC ATCC CRL-1611
SK-OV-3 ATCC ATCC HTB-77
DLD1 KRAS (+/-) Horizon Discovery HD 105-002
DLD1 KRAS (G13D/-) Horizon Discovery HD 105-011
Experimental Models: Organisms/Strains
Female SCID mice Charles River Laboratories N/A
Oligonucleotides
shRNA KRAS B sequence : CACCGTT
GGAGCTGGTGGtGTgGGCTTCAA
GAGAGCCTACGCCACCAGCTCCAAC

This paper, Sanofi N/A

shRNA KRAS H sequence : CACCGGT
CCTGCTGACAAATCAgGATTCAAGAG
ATCTTGATTTGTCAGCAGGACC

This paper, Sanofi N/A

(Continued on next page)

e1 Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717.e1–e11, June 21, 2018
CONTACT FOR REAGENT AND RESOURCE SHARING

Further information and requests for resources and reagents should be directed to and will be fulfilled by the Lead Contact, Stuart
Licht (sslicht@gmail.com).

EXPERIMENTAL MODEL AND SUBJECT DETAILS

In Vivo Animal Studies
All in vivo experiments were performed according to institutional guidelines as approved by the Sanofi Institutional Animal Care and
Use Committee. 5x106 KP-4 cells were suspended in 50% matrigel and 50%DPBS and implanted subcutaneously into the right flank
of 78 week old female Severe Combined Immuno Deficiency (SCID) mice (Charles River Laboratories). The tumors were allowed to
establish until average tumor volume reached about 200-250 mm3
. Subsequently mice were randomized into control and treated
groups (n=10/group), Tumor growth was monitored over time using caliper measurements. Subcutaneous tumor volume was calculated
using the formula: length 3 width2
/2. Brequinar was formulated in 20% HPbCD in 10mM phosphate buffer. Animals were orally
administered brequinar at 1, 3, 10, 30 mg/kg once daily for 14 days. For the pharmacodynamic studies (Figures 6A–6C), three mice
were used for each time point. In the efficacy study (Figure 6D), ten mice were used in each group.

Cell Lines

The following cell lines were used as a panel for initial testing in soft agar : PANC-1 (pancreatic), KP-4 (pancreatic), CFPAC-1 (pancreatic),
MiaPaCa-2 (pancreatic), HCT-116 (colon), DLD-1 (colon), SK-OV-3 (ovarian), ACHN (kidney), H1299 (lung), UISO-BCA-1
(breast). Chemoproteomic experiments, cell cycle analysis, mitochondrial potential experiments, metabolite profiling, and drug
synergy experiments were carried out using KP-4 cells. For capillary electrophoresis-based metabolomics experiments, DLD-1 cells
bearing either a single mutant or single wild-type allele were used (DLD1 KRAS (+/-) HD-105-002 and DLD1 KRAS (G13D/-) HD-105-
011, Horizon Discovery). All cells were cultured at 37C in humidified incubators at 5% CO2.

METHOD DETAILS

Reagents

Biochemical reagents were obtained from Sigma-Aldrich unless otherwise specified. Brequinar was synthesized as previously
described (Hesson, 1987). MEK inhibitor PD0325901 was purchased from Selleck Chemicals.

Compound Screening in 3D Cultures

SeaPrep agarose (Lonza #50302) was used for cell culture. A 6% (w/v) agarose solution in PBS (Gibco#10010) was prepared by mixing
the components in an autoclavable bottle via magnetic stirring. The suspension was autoclaved, then stirred again until homogeneous.
The final concentration diluted in media for cell culture was 1%; volumes of the 6% stock solution (1.05 g/mL) were
measured gravimetrically.
For assay purposes, a mixture of cells and agarose (final concentration of agarose 1% in complete media, 40,000 cells/ml) was
prepared from cell and agarose stocks pre-warmed to 37C, and kept at 37C until it was dispensed via an automated liquid handling
system (Thermo Scientific Multidrop Combi) into 384-well ultra low-attachment plates (Corning, #3827); low-attachment plates were
used to ensure that any cells that settle will remain rounded rather than attaching to the plate, such plates eliminate the need for the
traditional bottom agar layer. The plates were incubated at 4C for 15-30 minutes to allow gelling to occur. After gelling of the agarose,
the cultures were incubated at 5% CO2 and 37C in a humidified incubator. Clonogenicity of cell lines was determined using this culture
system for cell lines of interest.
Compound plates for screening were prepared in advance using acoustic dispensing (Labcyte Echo). On day 4 after plating of
cells, compounds to be screened (in DMSO stock) were diluted in media and added to the culture plates using an automated liquid
dispenser (BioMek FX). On day 7 after plating of cells,Alamar Blue dye (10 ml) was added to culture plates using an automated liquid
dispenser (BioMek FX), and the plates were incubated at 37C (incubation periods were optimized for each cell line to maximize the

Continued

REAGENT or RESOURCE SOURCE IDENTIFIER

Recombinant DNA

pLKO_IRES-Puro_DEST Sanofi internal collection N/A

Other

Ultra low-attachment 384 well plates Corning Cat#3827

Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717.e1–e11, June 21, 2018 e2
fluorescence signal and avoid reagent depletion). Fluorescence (Ex/Em 530 nm/590 nm) was measured (Envision 2104 multi-label
reader) to determine cell viability.

KRAS Knockdown: shRNA Expression and Gene Down-Regulation

shRNAs against KRAS were cloned in a Tet-inducible pLKO vector (pLKO_IRES_Puro_Dest). The shRNA sequences used were the
following: shRNA KRAS B, CACCGTTGGAGCTGGTGGtGTgGGCTTCAAGAGAGCCTACGCCACCAGCTCCAAC ; shRNA KRAS H,
CACCGGTCCTGCTGACAAATCAgGATTCAAGAGATCTTGATTTGTCAGCAGGACC.
The shRNA-expressing lentiviral vectors were packaged in 293T cells using the Trans-Lentiviral packaging kit (OpenBiosystems).
Culture medium containing virus was collected and filtered. Cells were transduced with virus and subjected to puromycin selection.
After selection, the surviving cells were grown in 3D culture as previously described, and doxycycline was added to the culture to
induce shRNA expression. Cells were re-fed with doxycycline every 2 or 3 days.
Downregulation of KRAS at the mRNA level was determined using a KRAS Taqman Gene Expression assay - Hs00270666_m1
(Thermofisher) and Cells-To-Ct kit (Ambion/ABI, #4399002). RPL37A - Hs01102345_m1 (ThermoFisher) was used as a housekeeping
gene for normalization. Cells were plated in a 96-well format. Seventy-two hours after shRNA induction, cells were washed with 1X
PBS. cDNA preparation from cell lysates and qPCR were carried out according to the manufacturer’s instructions.
To determine down-regulation of KRAS protein, cells were plated in 6-well plates. Seventy-two hours after shRNA induction, the
cells were washed with 1X PBS and lysed in 1X RIPA lysis buffer (Thermo 89901) containing 1X Halt Protease and phosphatase inhibitor
(Thermo 78440). Samples were run on NuPage Novex 4-12% Bis-Tris polyacrylamide protein gels, and transferred to membranes
using the iBlot system (Invitrogen). Membranes were incubated with an anti-Ras antibody (Millipore Sigma #: 05-516) and
probed using secondary antibodies (LiCOR). b-actin (Millipore sigma #A5316) was used a loading control.

Cell Line Sensitivity Profiling

A set of 640 mechanistically diverse compounds were obtained from commercial sources or an internal library. A total of 374 cancer
cell lines of diverse origin were obtained from commercial vendors. Cell lines were chosen to sample diverse gene expression profiles.
The cell lines represented 27 tissue types, with some lineages, such as liver, lung, pancreas, and stomach, being more highly
represented. The cell lines were cultured in vendor-recommended media using standard culturing techniques, either in a biological
safety cabinet or using an automated cell culture system (CompacT, Sartorius, Wilmington DE.). For dose-response studies, all compounds
were dissolved in DMSO and diluted in an 8-point dilution series, and an aliquot (10 mL) of each dilution was placed in a Labcyte-certified
LDV 384-well polystyrene plate. The starting stock concentrations used were between 0.1 mM to 10 mM, depending on
compound activity, solubility, and availability.
To screen the compounds for bioactivity against the cell line panel, a Labcyte Echo (Sunnyvale CA) liquid dispensing system was
used to transfer compound solution (25 nL) to 384-well assay plates (Greiner Bio-One, Monroe, NC). In addition to library compounds,
each assay plate also contained DMSO vehicle controls and a staurosporine (Sigma, St Louis MO) positive control. All liquid
dispensing and assay steps subsequent to the initial compound transfer were performed using a custom robotics platform (GNF,
San Diego CA). Cell suspension (25 mL) was added to each well, using a seeding density between 250 and 1500 cells per well, depending
on the cell line. Assay plates were incubated at 37C for 72-168 hours. Cell numbers were determined by adding
Hoechst34580 DNA staining dye (5 mL; Invitrogen) to a final concentration of 2 mg/mL. Assay plates were incubated for 3 hours at
37C, 9% paraformaldehyde (10 mL; EMS Hatfield, PA ) was added, and the plates were incubated at room temperature for 4 h.
Following fixation, cell counts were determined using an Acumen microplate cytometer (TTP Labtech Cambridge MA). Cell number
values were corrected for pattern artifacts, and normalized to the vehicle control and the number of untreated cells initially plated in
order to quantify effects on growth inhibition; growth inhibition was calculated as (median cell number-treated/median cell number
untreated)*100. All dose-response fitting was performed on normalized data using either a four-parameter logistic nonlinear regression
model or a constant model (Genedata AG).
For DLD-1 cell lines, cells were plated at a density of 3000 cells/well and cultured for 2 days before drug and/or uridine treatment;
after 72 hours of treatment, viable cell density was quantified using the CellTiter Glo assay (Promega).
A subset of data containing a matrix of growth inhibition potencies from 372 cell lines (53 of which contain mutant KRAS) and 489
compounds was used for the analysis of the effect of KRAS mutation status on compound bioactivity. A t-test was performed for each
compound, comparing the mean of potencies in KRAS-mutant and wild-type cell lines. The Bonferroni correction for multiple comparisons
was applied to the final p-values. The result is shown in a volcano plot. In a similar analysis, the effects of mutation status of
multiple oncogenes on the potencies of the lead thiazolimine was also compared.

Biochemical Pull-Down Experiment with Thiazolimine-Conjugated Beads

Protein pull-down using chemically modified beads was performed as described previously (Bantscheff et al., 2007). KP-4 cells separately
SILAC-labeled with either L-arginine and L-lysine (light) or L-arginine-13C6 and L-lysine-13C6-
15N2 (heavy) were prepared in lysis
buffer containing 1% Nonidet P-40, 50 mM Tris/HCl, pH 7.5, 5% glycerol, 1.5 mM MgCl2, 150 mM NaCl, 1 mM EDTA, and protease
inhibitors (Complete tablets, Roche Applied Science, IN). Lysates were vortexed intermittently and chilled on ice for 10 min, followed
by centrifugation at 14,0003g. Protein concentrations of lysates were measured using the Protein BCA Assay (Thermo Pierce, CA),

e3 Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717.e1–e11, June 21, 2018
and lysates were diluted to a final protein concentration of 5 mg/ml in the lysis buffer. The heavy amino acid-labeled cell lysate was
pre-incubated with the active competitor compound Compound 2 (50 nM or 1 mM, in separate aliquots) for 1 h. The light amino acidlabeled
cell lysate was treated with DMSO as a control. Beads conjugated with the thiazolimine (200 ml) were added to each lysate
and incubated on an end-over-end rotator for 4 h at 4C. After incubation, the bead/lysate mixture was centrifuged at 10003g and the
supernatant was aspirated. The beads from each lysate were washed with lysis buffer to remove excess soluble small molecule
competitor. Beads from the heavy and light amino acid-labeled lysates were combined and washed (3X) with lysis buffer supplemented
with 0.1% SDS buffer. After the final wash, beads were collected by centrifugation at 10003g, and the residual buffer
was carefully aspirated to avoid disturbing the beads.

SDS/PAGE and In-Gel Digestion

Proteins bound to thiazolimine-conjugated beads were reduced and alkylated on-bead in 10 mM DTT and 25 mM iodoacetamide
respectively. NuPAGE LDS sample buffer (Invitrogen) was added to bead mixtures, followed by heating to 60C for 40 min. Eluted
proteins were resolved on a 4n) was added to bead Bis-Tris gel with MES running buffer (Nupage, Invitrogen), and stained with Coomassie
Blue (Simply Blue, Invitrogen). Gel lanes were excised into twelve pieces, each of which was cut into 1 x 1 mm cubes. The gel
pieces were further destained three times in a solution containing 50% acetonitrile and 50% ammonium bicarbonate (50 mM), then
dehydrated in 100% acetonitrile and completely dried in a vacuum concentrator (SpeedVac, Thermo Scientific) before addition of
sufficient trypsin solution (12.5 ng/L) to swell the gel pieces. The gel pieces were incubated in the trypsin solution at 37C overnight.
The peptides were extracted three times from the gel in 2:1 (vol/vol) acetonitrile/5% formic acid and dried in a vacuum concentrator to
remove organic solvents. The peptides were re-dissolved in an aqueous solution containing 0.1% formic acid and 5% acetonitrile for
mass spectrometry analysis.

iTRAQ Labeling of the Digested Pull-Down Samples

iTRAQ labeling was performed using the iTRAQ Reagent kit (AB SCIEX, CA) according to the manufacturer’s instructions. The peptides
extracted from the SDS-PAGE gel were dried and reconstituted in the labeling buffer (0.5 M tetraethylammonium bromide) provided
with the kit. The peptides from the control lysate (treated with DMSO) were labeled with iTRAQ reagent 114, and the peptides
from lysate treated with 10 nM, 100 nM and 1 mM active competitor Compound 2 were labeled with iTRAQ reagents 115, 116, and
117, respectively. After labeling with iTRAQ reagents, the peptides were incubated at room temperature for 2 h and pooled.

Mass Spectrometry Analysis and Data Interpretation

LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out on a LTQ OrbitrapVelos mass spectrometer (Thermo Scientific, MA) equipped with a
Thermo nanospray source (Thermo, San Jose, CA) and coupled to an Eksigent NanoLC Ultra 2D system (ABsciex). Separation
of peptide mixtures was achieved on a 75 mm I.D. microcapillary trap column packed with 18 cm of Magic C18resin (3 mm, 200 A˚ ,
MichromBioresources) with a gradient of acetonitrile (3% -35%) in 0.1% FA for 145 minutes at a flow rate of 300 nL/min.
A voltage of 3 kV was applied to generate electrospray. All the MS and MS/MS spectra were acquired in the data-dependent
mode. The full-scan spectra (from m/z 300-1800) were acquired at resolution 60,000 at m/z 400, with an accumulation target value
of 1 x 106
. The top 20 most intense ions at a threshold above 500 counts were selected for fragmentation by CID at a normalized
collision energy of 40%. Dynamic exclusion was applied to reject ions from repeated MS/MS selection for 90 ms using monoisotopic
precursor selection. Singly-charged ions and those with unassigned charge state were also excluded from MS/MS.
The mass spectrometry data were processed using the Proteome Discoverer 1.3 software (Thermo Scientific). The MS/MS peak
lists were extracted and searched by MASCOT against a concatenated forward and reversed version of the Swiss-prot human database.
The precursor and fragment mass tolerances were set to 10 ppm and 0.5 Da, respectively. Cysteine carbamidomethylation was
searched as a fixed modification, while N-acetyl protein, N-pyroglutamine, oxidized methionine, phosphorylation of serine, threonine,
and tyrosine and SILAC labels on arginine and lysine were searched as variable modifications. The raw MS files were loaded to PD
1.3, and peptides were quantified with the MSQuant software embedded in the PD. MSQuant was used to calculate the ratio averaged
over the peptide elution time, and the assignments used for quantification were visually displayed and validated. To minimize
the false-discovery rate (FDR), all phosphopeptide identifications were filtered by MASCOT score. We accepted peptides based on
the criterion that the number of forward hits in the database was at least 200-fold higher than the number of reversed database hits,
which gives an estimated FDR of less than 1% (p < 0.01). The final filtering criteria were MASCOT score R 20 (p < 0.01), identification
of the peptide in the correct SILAC form (heavy or light), and presence of the correct number of lysine and arginine residues specified
by the mass difference observed in the full scan between the SILAC partners.

DHODH Biochemical Assay

DHODH activity was measured using a coupled assay with 2,6-dichloroindophenol (DCIP) as the terminal electron acceptor. Reactions
were carried out in UV-transparent plates (Corning #3675). The reaction mixture comprised HEPES buffer (100 mM, pH 7.5),
sodium chloride ( 150 mM), Triton X-100 (0.01%), dihydroorotate (10 mM), decylubiquinone (10 mM), and DCIP (60 mM). The reaction
was initiated by the addition of recombinant dihydroorotate dehydrogenase (5 nM, Creative Biomart part #DHODH-2486). Reaction
progress was monitored by measuring the absorbance at 600 nm (extinction coefficient of the reduced DCIP product, 18.8 M-1 cm-1;
absorbance measured using an Envision 2104 plate reader equipped with a monochromator).

Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717.e1–e11, June 21, 2018 e4
Cell Cycle Analysis

KP-4 cells were treated with Compound 2 or DMSO (vehicle control) for 24 or 48 h, then collected and fixed with ice-cold ethanol.
Fixed cells were treated with RNAse, stained with propidium iodide, and subjected to flow cytometric analysis in duplicate to quantify
DNA content.

Mitochondrial Membrane Potential Assay

KP-4 cells were treated with DHODH inhibitors at the defined concentrations for 72 h. After treatment, cells were stained with
MitoTracker dye (ThermoFisher M7512; 300nM), washed with 1X PBS, fixed with paraformaldehyde (3.7%), and stained with
Hoechst dye (Life Technologies H1399). Image acquisition was performed using a Perkin Elmer Opera QEHS automated microscope
equipped with an Olympus 10X UPlanSApo objective. Hoechst33342 and Mitotracker Red CMXRos epifluorescence were detected
using 450/50 nm and 600/40 nm bandpass filters, respectively, with excitation from 405 nm and 561 nm solid-state lasers. Mitochondrial
depolarization was quantified by measuring the decrease in Mitotracker Red CMXRos relative fluorescence intensity (RFI). Fluorescene
intensity data were analyzed using Perkin Elmer Columbus software: nuclei were segmented based on Hoechst staining,
and through dilation of the nuclei segmentation mask, a ring region was created in which Mitotracker mean relative fluorescence
intensity was calculated.

LC-MS/MS Mass Spectrometric Metabolite Analysis of Cells and Tumor Tissues

LC-MS/MS analysis was carried out using an ABSciex QTrap 5500 mass spectrometer coupled to a 1290 Infinity UHPLC system
(Agilent). Samples were injected using a PAL HTC autosampler (LEAP Technologies). Separation of DHO and metabolites in the pyrimidine
synthesis pathway was achieved on an ACQUITY UPLC CSH Fluoro-Phenyl column (50 mm 3 2.1 mm, 1.7 mm Waters) at a
flow rate of 0.50 ml/min. The elution protocol used was the following: holding mobile phase A (0.1% acetic acid in water) at 95% for
0.5 min; ramping mobile phase B (0.1% acetic acid in acetonitrile) from 5 to 95% over 4 min; holding mobile phase B at 90%
for 0.5 min.
DHO and orotate were detected via their MRM transitions in the ESI negative mode; these were m/z 157 / 113 and m/z 155 /
111, for DHO and orotate, respectively. The transition for uridine was m/z 245/113 in the ESI positive mode. Instrument parameters
were the following: spray voltage, 4000 V; source temperature, 450C; ion source gas, 30 liter/h; and collision energy, 17 eV. Mass
spectrometric data were acquired and processed using the Analyst software (ABSciex).
For analysis of cellular samples, cells were treated with compounds of interest for 24 h. Cell pellets (1 million cells) were suspended
in 80% methanol/water (500 ml) that had been chilled on dry ice. After brief sonication, the samples were centrifuged and
the supernatants were collected. The pellets were resuspended in the methanol/water mixture used previously, and the extraction
was repeated two additional times. The combined supernatants were dried in a centrifugal evaporator. The residues were reconstituted
in water, and the resulting solutions were injected directly into the LC/MS-MS instrument for analysis of metabolites.
For samples from in vivo studies, tissue blocks were homogenized in 80% methanol/water (1 ml) using Precelly-24 with 2.8 mm
ceramic beads (5500 rpm for 2 x 30 sec). The homogenate was centrifuged at 14000 rpm for 10 min and the supernatants were transferred.
The methanol was removed by evaporation under vacuum, and the residue was reconstituted in water (2 ml) for the LC/MS/
MS analysis.

CE-TOFMS Mass Spectrometric Metabolite Analysis of Cells and Tumor Tissues

DLD1 KRAS (+/-) HD-105-002 and DLD1 KRAS (G13D/-) HD-105-011 were obtained from Horizon Discovery. Cells were plated in
RPMI 1640 with glutamine. Culture medium was aspirated the next day and cells treated with 2 mM Brequinar in absence or presence
of 500 mM uridine in C13 glutamine labeled RPMI for 4 hours. For extraction of intracellular metabolites, culture medium was aspirated
and cells were washed twice with a 5% mannitol solution. The cells were treated with 800 mL of methanol and 550 mL of Milli-Q water
containing internal standards (H3304-1002, Human Metabolome Technologies, Inc., Tsuruoka, Japan). The extract was centrifuged
at 2,300 3g and 4C for 5 min and then 800 mL of upper aqueous layer was centrifugally filtered through a Millipore 5-kDa cutoff filter
at 9,100 3g and 4C for 120 min to remove proteins. The filtrate was centrifugally concentrated and re-suspended in 50 mL of Milli-Q
water for CE-MS analysis.
Metabolome measurements were carried out through a facility service at Human Metabolome Technology Inc., Tsuruoka, Japan.
Hierarchical cluster analysis (HCA) and principal component analysis (PCA) were performed using proprietary software: PeakStat
and SampleStat, respectively. Detected metabolites were plotted on metabolic pathway maps using VANTED (Visualization and
Analysis of Networks containing Experimental Data) software.

Synergistic Combinations in KRAS Mutant Cell Context

A 12x12 dose matrix of co-plated enhancer and enhancee compounds was used to evaluate whether combination exhibited synergy.
Cell culture was carried out in 2D format, as described in ‘‘Cell Line Sensitivity Profiling.’’
Compounds were diluted in a 12-point dilution series and dispensed in 40 ml aliquots into each well of a Labcyte-certified 384-well
polypropylene plate. The enhancee compounds, brequinar and a DHODH inhibitor from the thiazolimine series (Compound 2), were
diluted and plated (in 25 nL aliquots) in the same format as the enhancer compounds using a Labcyte Echo (Sunnyvale CA)
dispensing system. Cell culture and cell-based screening for growth inhibition effects (using KP-4 cells at a density of 500 cells/
well, and a 72-hour treatment period) were carried out as described for ‘‘Cell Line Sensitivity Screening.’’

e5 Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717.e1–e11, June 21, 2018
Three types of synergy scores, including Loewe, Bliss and HSA, were generated using software for analysis of in vitro pharmacology
data (GeneData AG). For each type of synergy score (Loewe, Bliss, and HSA), a robust Z-test was performed to identify potential
combination partners for Compound 2. Specifically, a robust Z score was calculated for each compound combination as the
difference between the synergy score from given combination and the median of synergy scores from self-cross experiments,
divided by the median absolute deviation of synergy scores from self-cross experiments. The distributions of synergy scores from
the self-cross experiments were found to be approximately normal for all three synergy score types, enabling the generation of
two-tailed p values for each robust Z score. Since multiple robust Z tests were performed, multiple testing adjustment of p values
was performed, using the Benjamini-Hochberg method. Any compound combination with a synergy score satisfying the criteria
of Z > 0 and adjusted p value <= 0.05 was flagged as ‘‘synergistic.’’

General Synthetic Methods

Reagents and solvents were purchased from commercial sources and were used without further purification. All reactions were run
under nitrogen atmosphere unless otherwise noted. Purification of reaction products was carried out by flash column chromatography
using Teledyne Isco Combiflash Rf and Redisep normal-phase silica flash columns (230-400 mesh). Analytical thin layer chromatography
was performed on EMD Millipore DC-Kieselgel 60 F254 plates. Visualization was accomplished with UV light, potassium
permanganate, ninhydrin or Hanessian stain followed by heating. Proton nuclear magnetic resonance spectra (1
H NMR) were
recorded on a Varian Inova 400MHz spectrometer and are reported in ppm using solvent as an internal standard (DMSO-d6 at
2.50 ppm, methanol-d4 at 3.31 ppm, acetone-d6 at 2.09 ppm). Data are reported as br = broad peak, s = singlet, d = doublet,
t = triplet, q = quadruplet, p = quintuplet, dd = doublet of doublets, ddd = doublet of doublet of doublets, m = multiplet; integration;
coupling constant(s) in Hz. HPLC-MS analysis was carried out on a Waters Acquity UPLC
with autosampler, PDA detector and SQ
mass spectrometer using Acquity UPLC
BEH C18 1.7um 2.1 x 50mm column. Preparative HPLC was performed on a Gilson Preparative
HPLC system using a SunFireTM Prep C18 OBDTM 5uM 19x100mm column.

Synthetic Protocols

Scheme 1. Synthetic Routes

Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717.e1–e11, June 21, 2018 e6
Procedure 1a

1-(4-Methyl-2-phenylthiazol-5-yl)ethanone (5)
To a solution of benzothioamide (5 g, 36.44 mmol) in ethanol (36.44 ml, 36.44 mmol) was added 3-chloro-2,4-pentanedione (4.24 ml,
36.44 mmol) at room temperature. The mixture was stirred at reflux for 4 h. An LC/MS indicated complete reaction. The mixture
was allowed to cool down to room temperature. A precipitate formed. It was concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue
was recrystallized from hexanes to provide 1-(4-methyl-2-phenylthiazol-5-yl)ethanone (3.6 g, 16.57 mmol, 45.5 % yield). 1
H NMR
(400 MHz, DMSO-d6) d 8.07 – 7.93 (m, 2H), 7.61 – 7.46 (m, 3H), 2.71 (s, 3H), 2.58 (s, 3H). ESI-MS m/z 218.2 [(M + H)+
; calcd. for
C12H12NOS: 218.06].
Procedure 1b

2-Bromo-1-(4-methyl-2-phenylthiazol-5-yl)ethan-1-one (6)
To a solution of 1-(4-methyl-2-phenylthiazol-5-yl)ethanone (3 g, 13.81 mmol) in dichloromethane (69.03 ml, 13.81 mmol) was added
bromine (924.67 ml, 17.95 mmol). The solution was stirred at 40C overnight. The mixture was concentrated under reduced pressure.
The residue was triturated in methanol then dried under vacuum to give 2-bromo-1-(4-methyl-2-phenylthiazol-5-yl)ethan-1-one
(3.26 g, 10.99 mmol, 79.6 %). 1
H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) d 7.97 (m, 2H), 7.64 – 7.40 (m, 3H), 4.75 (s, 2H), 2.69 (s, 3H). ESI-MS
m/z 296.1 [(M + H)+
; calcd. for C12H11BrNOS: 295.97].

2-Bromo-1-(4-methyl-2-(pyrazin-2-yl)thiazol-5-yl)ethan-1-one
This compound was obtained from a commercial source (Oakwood Chemical, West Columbia, South Carolina).
Procedure 2

1-(4-Hydroxy-2-methylphenyl)-3-methylthiourea (7)
To a solution of 4-amino-3-methylphenol (1 g, 8.12 mmol) in THF (27.07 ml, 8.12 mmol) was added isothiocyanatomethane (610.36 ml,
8.93 mmol). The mixture was stirred at 60C overnight then concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by flash
chromatography (using a gradient of 10% ethyl acetate in hexanes to 100% ethyl acetate) to afford 1-(4-hydroxy-2-methylphenyl)-3-
methylthiourea (1.05 g, 5.35 mmol, 65.9 % yield) 1
H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) d 9.30 (s, 1H), 8.83 (s, 1H), 6.98 (d, J = 57.0 Hz, 1H),

e7 Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717.e1–e11, June 21, 2018
6.84 (d, J = 8.4 Hz, 1H), 6.60 (d, J = 2.6 Hz, 1H), 6.54 (dd, J = 8.4, 2.7 Hz, 1H), 2.81 (d, J = 4.5 Hz, 3H), 2.02 (s, 3H). ESI-MS m/z
197.1 [(M + H)+
; calcd. for C9H13N2OS: 197.08].

1-(2-Chloro-4-hydroxyphenyl)-3-methylthiourea (8)
To a solution of 4-amino-3-chlorophenol (0.749 g, 5.22 mmol) in THF (17.39 ml, 5.22 mmol) was added isothiocyanatomethane
(427.79 ml, 6.26 mmol). The solution was stirred at 60C overnight. The resulting suspension was cooled to room temperature and
filtered. The remaining solid was washed with ethanol to produce 1-(2-chloro-4-hydroxyphenyl)-3-methylthiourea (785 mg,
3.62 mmol, 69.4 % yield) 1
H NMR (400 MHz, methanol-d4) d 7.16 (d, J = 8.7 Hz, 1H), 6.88 (d, J = 2.7 Hz, 1H), 6.73 (dd, J = 8.7,
2.7 Hz, 1H), 2.97 (s, 3H). ESI-MS m/z 217.1 [(M + H)+
; calcd. for C8H10ClN2OS: 217.02].

Tert-butyl (3-(3-(4-hydroxy-2-methylphenyl)thioureido)propyl)carbamate (9)
To a solution of 4-amino-3-methylphenol (50 mg, 406.00 mmol) in THF (2.0 ml, 24.41 mmol) was added tert-butyl (3-isothiocyanatopropyl)carbamate
(131.73 mg, 609.00 mmol). The mixture was stirred at room temperature for 3 hours. An LC/MS indicated reaction
completion. The mixture was concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was purified by flash chromatography (using a
gradient of 10% ethyl acetate in hexanes to 100% ethyl acetate) to provide tert-butyl (3-(3-(4-hydroxy-2-methylphenyl)thioureido)
propyl)carbamate (117 mg, 344.67 mmol, 84.9 % yield). 1
H NMR (400 MHz, acetone-d6) d 8.44 (br s, 1H), 8.30 (br s, 1H), 6.99
(d, J = 8.4 Hz, 1H), 6.83 (br s, 1H), 6.75 (d, J = 2.7 Hz, 1H), 6.68 (dd, J = 8.4, 2.8 Hz, 1H), 6.09 (br s, 1H), 3.63 (q, J = 6.3 Hz, 2H),
3.06 (q, J = 6.3 Hz, 3H), 2.17 (s, 3H), 1.74 – 1.61 (m, 2H), 1.36 (s, 9H). ESI-MS m/z 340.2 [(M + H)+
; calcd. for C16H26N3O3S: 340.17].
Procedure 3

(Z)-3-chloro-4-((3,4’-dimethyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)amino)phenol (10)
A suspension of 1-(2-chloro-4-hydroxyphenyl)-3-methylthiourea (35 mg, 161.52 mmol) and 2-bromo-1-(4-methyl-2-(pyrazin-2-yl)
thiazol-5-yl)ethanone (48.16 mg, 161.52 mmol) in isopropanol (2.0 mL) was stirred with microwave heating at 100C for 1 h. The
mixture was then dissolved in methanol (1.0 mL) and triethylamine (1.0 mL). The solution was concentrated under reduced pressure.
The residue was purified via flash chromatography on silica gel (using a gradient of 30% to 100% of ethyl acetate in hexanes, followed
by 10% methanol in dichloromethane) to give (Z)-3-chloro-4-((3,4’-dimethyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)amino)
phenol (43 mg, 103.39 mmol, 64.0 % yield). 1
H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) d 9.47 (s, 1H), 9.32 (d, J = 1.5 Hz, 1H), 8.78 (d, J =
2.5 Hz, 1H), 8.73 (dd, J = 2.5, 1.5 Hz, 1H), 6.93 (d, J = 8.6 Hz, 1H), 6.86 (d, J = 2.7 Hz, 1H), 6.71 (dd, J = 8.6, 2.7 Hz, 1H),
6.58 (s, 1H), 3.26 (s, 3H), 2.46 (s, 3H). ESI-MS m/z 416.2 [(M + H)+
; calcd. for C18H15ClN5OS2: 416.04].

Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717.e1–e11, June 21, 2018 e8
(Z)-3-(2-((4-hydroxy-2-methylphenyl)imino)-4’-methyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-3(2H)-yl)propan-1-aminium
2,2,2-trifluoroacetate (11)
2-bromo-1-(4-methyl-2-(pyrazin-2-yl)thiazol-5-yl)ethanone (102.77 mg, 344.67 mmol) and tert-butyl (3-(3-(4-hydroxy-2-methylphenyl)thioureido)propyl)carbamate
(117 mg, 344.67 mmol) were dissolved in dry isopropanol (2 mL). The solution was stirred with
microwave heating at 80C for 8 hours. Triethylamine (1.0 mL) was added. The mixture was concentrated under reduced pressure.
The residue was purified by flash chromatography (using a gradient of 100% dichloromethane to 15% methanol in dichloromethane).
The product was dissolved in dichloromethane (2.0 mL). TFA (1.0 mL) was added. The mixture was stirred at room temperature for
2 h. LC-MS indicated reaction completion. The mixture was concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was dissolved in
DMSO and purified by preparative HPLC to afford (Z)-4-((3-(3-aminopropyl)-4’-methyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)amino)-3-methylphenol
2,2,2-trifluoroacetate (88 mg, 112.73 mmol, 32.7 % yield) after lyophilization of the fraction containing
the pure product. 1
H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) d 9.36 (d, J = 1.5 Hz, 1H), 8.83 (d, J = 2.5 Hz, 1H), 8.77 (dd, J = 2.5, 1.5 Hz, 1H),
7.78 (br s, 3H), 7.04 (br s, 1H), 6.77 (d, J = 2.2 Hz, 1H), 6.70 (dd, J = 8.5, 2.3 Hz, 1H), 4.00 – 3.90 (m, 2H), 2.95 – 2.68 (m, 2H),
2.54 (s, 1H), 2.48 (s, 3H), 2.18 (s, 3H), 1.93 (p, J = 7.9 Hz, 2H). ESI-MS m/z 439.2 [(M + H)+
; calcd. for C21H23N6OS2: 439.14

(Z)-N-(3-(2-((4-hydroxy-2-methylphenyl)imino)-4’-methyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-3(2H)-yl)propyl)
acetamide (12)
Acetic anhydride (1.90 ml, 20.18 mmol was added dropwise to a solution of (Z)-4-((3-(3-aminopropyl)-4’-methyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-
bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)amino)-3-methylphenol 2,2,2-trifluoroacetate (15 mg, 19.22 mmol) in pyridine (64.05 ml, 19.22 mmol) ). The
mixture was stirred at room temperature for 30 minutes. An LC/MS indicated reaction completion. The reaction mixture was concentrated
under reduced pressure. The residue was purified using flash chromatography (with a gradient of 30% to 100% ethyl acetate in
hexanes) to provide (Z)-N-(3-(2-((4-hydroxy-2-methylphenyl)imino)-4’-methyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-3(2H)-yl)propyl)acetamide
(4.73 mg, 9.84 mmol, 51.2 % yield). 1
H NMR (400 MHz, methanol-d4) d 9.37 (d, J = 1.4 Hz, 1H), 8.68 (d, J = 2.5 Hz, 1H),
8.66 (dd, J = 2.5, 1.5 Hz, 1H), 6.83 (d, J = 8.4 Hz, 1H), 6.73 (d, J = 2.7 Hz, 1H), 6.65 (dd, J = 8.4, 2.8 Hz, 1H), 6.43 (s, 1H), 3.95 –
3.81 (m, 2H), 3.14 (t, J = 6.5 Hz, 2H), 2.66 (s, 1H), 2.50 (s, 3H), 2.16 (s, 3H), 1.90 (p, J = 6.8 Hz, 2H), 1.75 (s, 3H). ESI-MS m/z
481.2 [(M + H)+
; calcd. for C23H25N6O2S2: 481.15].

(Z)-3-chloro-4-((3,4’-dimethyl-2’-(4-(trifluoromethyl)phenyl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)amino)phenol (13)
This compound was synthesized as previously described for (Z)-3-chloro-4-((3,4’-dimethyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)amino)phenol.
1
H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) d 9.93 (br s, 1H), 8.15 (d, J = 8.1 Hz, 2H), 7.87 (d, J = 8.2 Hz, 2H), 7.13 (d, J = 8.5 Hz,
1H), 6.94 (d, J = 2.7 Hz, 1H), 6.89 (br s, 1H), 6.79 (dd, J = 8.6, 2.7 Hz, 1H), 3.37 (s, 3H), 2.42 (s, 3H). ESI-MS m/z 482.0 [(M + H)+
; calcd.
for C21H16ClF3N3OS2: 482.04].

(Z)-3-chloro-4-((3,4’-dimethyl-2’-phenyl-[4,5’-bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)amino)phenol (14)
This compound was synthesized as previously described for (Z)-3-chloro-4-((3,4’-dimethyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)amino)phenol.
1
H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) d 7.97 (dd, J = 6.5, 3.1 Hz, 2H), 7.64 – 7.47 (m, 3H), 7.22 (s, 1H), 6.99 (d, J = 2.5 Hz,
1H), 6.84 (dd, J = 8.5, 2.7 Hz, 1H), 3.42 (s, 3H), 2.43 (s, 3H). ESI-MS m/z 414.0 [(M + H)+
; calcd. for C20H17ClN3OS2: 414.05].

e9 Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717.e1–e11, June 21, 2018
Procedure 4

(Z)-tert-butyl (3-(3-chloro-4-((3,4’-dimethyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)amino)phenoxy)propyl)
carbamate (15)
To a solution of (Z)-3-chloro-4-((3,4’-dimethyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)amino)phenol (50 mg, 120.22 mmol)
in THF (0.4 mL) was added triphenylphosphine (63.06 mg, 240.43 mmol) and tert-butyl (3-hydroxypropyl)carbamate (41.10 ml,
240.43 mmol). (E)-diisopropyl diazene-1,2-dicarboxylate (47.34 ml, 240.43 mmol) was then added dropwise. The reaction mixture
was stirred at room temperature for 3 h. Upon reaction completion, the mixture was purified by preparative HPLC, using a gradient
of 10% acetonitrile in water (containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) to 100% in acetonitrile (containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid), to give
(Z)-tert-butyl (3-(3-chloro-4-((3,4’-dimethyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)amino)phenoxy)propyl)carbamate (43 mg,
75.03 mmol, 62.4 % yield). 1
H NMR. ESI-MS m/z 573.4 [(M + H)+
; calcd. for C26H30ClN6O3S2: 573.15].
Procedure 5

(Z)-3-(3-chloro-4-((3,4’-dimethyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)amino)phenoxy)propan-1-amine
bis(2,2,2-trifluoroacetate) (16)
To a solution of (Z)-tert-butyl (3-(3-chloro-4-((3,4’-dimethyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)amino)phenoxy)propyl)
carbamate (43 mg, 75.03 mmol) in dichloromethane (2 mL) was added trifluoroacetic acid (2 mL). The mixture was stirred at room
temperature for 30 minutes. LC/MS indicated reaction completion. The solvents were removed under reduced pressure to afford
(Z)-3-(3-chloro-4-((3,4’-dimethyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)amino)phenoxy)propan-1-amine bis(2,2,2-trifluoroacetate)
(49 mg, 69.89 mmol, 93.2 % yield). 1
H NMR. ESI-MS m/z 473.3 [(M + H)+
; calcd. for C21H22ClN6OS2: 473.10].
Procedure 6

(Z)-N-(3-(3-chloro-4-((3,4’-dimethyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)amino)phenoxy)propyl)
acetamide (17)
(Z)-3-chloro-4-((3,4’-dimethyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)amino)phenol (5.8 mg, 13.95 mmol), tert-butyl (4-hydroxypropyl)carbamate
(5.28 mg, 30.13 mmol), and triphenylphosphine (7.32 mg, 27.89 mmol) were dissolved in THF (46.48 ml,
13.95 mmol). (E)-diisopropyl diazene-1,2-dicarboxylate (5.49 ml, 27.89 mmol) was added dropwise at 0C. The mixture was stirred
at room temperature for 2 h. LC/MS indicated reaction completion. The reaction mixture was concentrated under reduced pressure.
The residue was dissolved in dichloromethane (1.0 mL). TFA was added (1.0 mL) and the mixture was stirred for 30 minutes. LC/MS
indicated full deprotection. The mixture was concentrated under reduced pressure. The residue was dissolved in pyridine (1.0 mL).
Acetic anhydride (7 ml, 74.19 mmol) was added. The reaction mixture was stirred at room temperature for 20 min and concentrated
under reduced pressure. The residue was purified using preparative HPLC, with a gradient of 10% acetonitrile in water (containing

Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717.e1–e11, June 21, 2018 e10
0.1% trifluoroacetic acid) to 100% in acetonitrile (containing 0.1% trifluoroacetic acid), to give (Z)-N-(3-(3-chloro-4-((3,4’-dimethyl-2’-
(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)amino)phenoxy)propyl)acetamide 2,2,2-trifluoroacetate (5.23 mg, 8.31 mmol, 59.6 %
yield). 1
H NMR (400 MHz, DMSO-d6) d 9.33 (d, J = 1.5 Hz, 1H), 8.79 (d, J = 2.5 Hz, 1H), 8.74 (dd, J = 2.5, 1.5 Hz, 1H), 7.89 (br t,
J = 5.4 Hz, 1H), 7.17 (br d, J = 8.7 Hz, 1H), 7.12 (d, J = 2.8 Hz, 1H), 6.94 (dd, J = 8.8, 2.8 Hz, 1H), 6.79 (br s, 1H), 3.99 (t, J =
6.3 Hz, 2H), 3.34 (s, 3H), 3.17 (q, J = 6.8 Hz, 2H), 2.46 (s, 3H), 1.88 – 1.73 (m, 5H). ESI-MS m/z 515.3 [(M + H)+
; calcd. for
C23H24ClN6O2S2: 515.11].
Procedure 7

Loading of Thiazolimine onto Sepharose FastFlow Beads (18)
Sepharose beads (8 mL of a 1:1 suspension in isopropanol) were separated in two 15 mL conical tubes (Falcon) and centrifuged at
1200 rpm for 2 minutes. The supernatant was removed. DMSO (10 mL) was added to each tube. The beads were resuspended and
the tubes were centrifuged as previously described. This centrifugation and re-suspension process was repeated twice, then once
more with the exception that anhydrous DMSO was used to suspend the beads. The supernatant and excess beads were removed to
adjust the volume to 2 mL of beads in each tube. Anhydrous DMSO (2.0 mL) was added to each tube, followed by a 50 mM DMSO
solution of (Z)-4-(3-aminopropoxy)-2-chloro-N-(3,4’-dimethyl-2’-(pyrazin-2-yl)-[4,5’-bithiazol]-2(3H)-ylidene)aniline 2,2,2-trifluoroacetate
(a total of 200.00 ml, 10 mmol). Triethylamine (60 ml, 430.48 mmol) was added to each tube and the beads were resuspended.
The suspension was centrifuged at 1200 rpm for 2 minutes. An aliquot (20 mL) of the supernatant in each tube was diluted 1:1 with
DMSO. The samples were analyzed using LC-MS to quantify the initial amount free amine in the reaction.
The beads were stirred at room temperature via inversion overnight (16 h) then centrifuged. An LC/MS of the aliquot of the supernatants
no longer showed the presence of free amine. Ethanolamine (200 ml, 3.31 mmol) was then added to each tube. The mixture
was stirred at room temperature overnight. The beads were centrifuged. The supernatant was removed, and the beads were resuspended
in anhydrous DMSO (10 mL) and centrifuged. The supernatant was removed and the beads were washed three times with
anhydrous ethanol (10 mL portions). The recovered beads from both tubes were combined and suspended in anhydrous ethanol in a
1:1 ratio.

QUANTIFICATION AND STATISTICAL ANALYSIS

Statisitical details can be found in the STAR Methods sub-section for each experiment, or in the Results section. Uncertainties are
expressed as the standard error in the mean. For in vitro experiments, n represents the number of independent biological replicates;
for in vivo experiments, n represents the number of animals. For correlations of potencies in biochemical/cell-based experiments,
Spearman’s rank order correlation was used, with use of the t-test for calculation of p values (reported in the Results section).

e11 Cell Chemical Biology 25, 705–717.e1–e11, June 21, 2018